Title: Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.22523v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Feb 2026 01:19:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Ryan Liu * 1 Dilip Arumugam * 1 Cedegao E. Zhang * 2 

Sean Escola 3 Xaq Pitkow 4 Thomas L. Griffiths 1 5 

# Abstract 

While contemporary large language models (LLMs) are increasingly capable in isolation, there are still many difficult problems that lie be-yond the abilities of a single LLM. For such tasks, there is still uncertainty about how best to take many LLMs as parts and combine them into a greater whole. This position paper argues that potential blueprints for designing such modular language agents can be found in the existing litera-ture on cognitive models and artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms. To make this point clear, we for-malize the idea of an agent template that specifies roles for individual LLMs and how their func-tionalities should be composed. We then survey a variety of existing language agents in the literature and highlight their underlying templates derived directly from cognitive models or AI algorithms. By highlighting these designs, we aim to call at-tention to agent templates inspired by cognitive science and AI as a powerful tool for developing effective, interpretable language agents. 

# 1. Introduction 

Recent research in artificial intelligence (AI) has increas-ingly focused on creating language agents—systems based on large language models (LLMs) interacting with one an-other or computational tools to more effectively perform a set of tasks (Su et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2025a; Xi et al., 2025). A challenge in this area is identi-fying effective agent designs—specifications of the roles 

> 1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University 

> 2

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Insti-tute of Technology 3Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute and Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University 4Neuroscience Institute and Department of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mel-lon University 5Department of Psychology, Princeton University. Correspondence to: Ryan Liu <ryanliu@princeton.edu >,Dilip Arumugam <dilip.a@cs.princeton.edu >, Ced Zhang <cedzhang@mit.edu >.

LLMs should play and how they should interact (Sumers et al., 2023; Cemri et al., 2025). The large search space of possible agent architectures makes brute force exploration infeasible and successful designs can often appear to be arbi-trary. While prolonged iteration over possible designs may work in some cases, practitioners trying to solve real-world problems in high-stakes settings seldom have the data and resources to do so, making it important to develop effective heuristics for designing language agents. Here, we argue for the position that cognitive models and existing AI algorithms provide templates for designing language agents . Cognitive models and AI algorithms have been informing each other since the beginning of their re-spective fields (Newell et al., 1958; Minsky, 1986). Here, we show that they provide effective design templates for language agents; the architecture of any language agent consists of distinct processes that are carefully ordered and executed sequentially to solve a problem. Many applications of interest for language agents involve problems that are ad-dressed by existing cognitive models and AI algorithms that are explicitly expressed in terms of such modular, sequential processing. Moreover, recent work has produced software tools that support the modular design and deployment of such language agents at scale (Vezhnevets et al., 2023). To support our position, we show how existing agent archi-tectures can be seen as instantiating cognitive models or AI algorithms, with applications that range from supporting effective communication (Liu et al., 2023) to improving planning (Webb et al., 2025) to exploring efficiently (Aru-mugam & Griffiths, 2025). While cognitive models are typically defined in narrow domains matching the assump-tions of specific behavioral experiments, a cognitive model identifies processes that can be implemented with LLMs and indicates how those processes should interact. Likewise, AI algorithms pick out procedural solutions to problems such as searching through a set of hypotheses or gathering informa-tion to select actions. Using LLMs to implement language agents based on cognitive models or AI algorithms broad-ens the applicability of existing models and algorithms with the flexibility and expressivity of natural language, making them applicable in new settings and at larger scales. 1

> arXiv:2602.22523v1 [cs.AI] 26 Feb 2026 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents

To make this argument, we first provide an explicit defini-tion of agent templates (Section 3). We define an agent template as a specification of a set of functions and the interactions between those functions. We then give con-crete examples of how cognitive models (Section 4) and AI algorithms (Section 5) have previously been used as agent templates. With these templates, the goals of an agent can be transformed into a pipeline defining how exactly the agent should break down and complete the task. This approach increases human interpretability and provides a coherent and previously-successful strategy for addressing many problems faced by language agents. 

# 2. Background 

2.1. Language agents 

Language agents are LLM-based autonomous agents that can follow language instructions to carry out diverse and complex tasks in real-world or simulated environments (Su et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024a). They have been used for various tasks including coding (e.g., Wang et al., 2024c; Wu, 2024; Anthropic, 2025; Yang et al., 2024a), customer ser-vice chatbots (Rocco, 2024; Sierra, 2026; Decagon, 2026), research (OpenAI, 2025; Sakana AI, 2024; Lu et al., 2024), and grounded robotics tasks (e.g., Ahn et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023; Raptis et al., 2025). Agent designs often aug-ment LLMs with goals and planning (Yao et al., 2023b; Park et al., 2023), persistent state or memory (Shinn et al., 2024; Packer et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025b), actions/tool use (Schick et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024e; Patil et al., 2024), and autonomy in order to complete tasks over multi-ple LLM calls (Wang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024). Most LLM agents leverage an instruction-tuned foundation model and construct agent scaffolding via prompting (Karpas et al., 2022; Sahoo et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2025b), although other approaches exist that further use fine-tuning (Chen et al., 2023a; Xu et al., 2023) or RL (Yao et al., 2022; Zhai et al., 2024; Qi et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025). Since language agents often tackle more complicated tasks (Wang et al., 2024a) and contain a multitude of com-ponents (e.g., memory) that each require implementation-level choices (Zhang et al., 2025d; Sumers et al., 2023), the number of potential architectures to search through rises accordingly. In reality, practitioners rarely search through the entirety of this space, instead relying on folk intuition, manual design, or even opportunistic chance to build their design (Zamfirescu-Pereira et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a; Cui et al., 2025). This choice is often partially due to the limited data available to conduct a search over architec-tures in domains in which AI agents are deployed (Liu et al., 2025b; Amodei et al., 2016; Kaufmann et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2020; Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019) including settings such as healthcare (Tang & Wiens, 2021). While a common method to address this is to simulate human data (e.g., Wang et al., 2024d; Yao et al., 2024), such solutions may not represent an adequate distribution of human rewards (Seshadri et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2025a). 

2.2. Agent design frameworks 

The definition of agent templates we introduce in the next section is not the first attempt to formalize modular LLM systems. Zhang et al. (2025b) introduce agentic context engineering as an agent-design framework consisting of a generator, reflector, and curator; while the generator pro-cesses queries with access to a dynamic “playbook,” a re-flector evaluates the generator’s successes and shortcomings so that they may be summarized by the curator for integra-tion into the next playbook. In parallel, He et al. (2025) introduce compressor-predictor systems as an agent-design framework consisting of a compressor LLM that compactly summarizes input data into a succinct context that may be leveraged by the subsequent predictor to produce outputs. While both frameworks encapsulate a number of agent de-signs, they operate at a strictly lower level of abstraction than our proposed agent templates. More importantly, these high-level decompositions are somewhat arbitrary and lack a degree of flexibility toward any problem. Sumers et al. (2023) share our high-level goal of connecting language agent research with cognitive science. They intro-duce the CoALA framework inspired by symbolic cognitive architectures research and use it to organize a wide body of work on agents, categorized in terms of relevant concepts (e.g., memory) and actions (e.g., retrieval). However, they leave the question of how to build such agents for future work and do not address concrete connections to either cog-nitive models or AI algorithms. Our work fills in these gaps and highlights the value of these connections. Closest to our agent templates are compound AI sys-tems (Khattab et al., 2023; Zaharia et al., 2024; Agrawal et al., 2025) and GPTSwarm (Zhuge et al., 2024). Both frameworks also propose a directed graph structure over LLMs and tools for composing language agents. Crucially, however, Khattab et al. (2023) and Zhuge et al. (2024) both approach the corresponding agent design problem given either a compound AI system or GPTSwarm as an optimiza-tion problem. While they demonstrate successful results on a variety of tasks with either a genetic algorithm for evolving an agent design or explicit reinforcement learning, such approaches fails to recognize the plethora of existing solutions for numerous sub-problems in cognitive science and AI. Our core position in this paper is that acknowledg-ing these existing solution concepts and embedding them into an agent design not only circumvents a laborious op-timization process but also lends a tremendous degree of interpretability to performant language agents. 2Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

# 3. Defining templates for language agents 

To provide common structure to our analysis of cognitive models and AI algorithms, this section provides a formal definition of a template for a language agent. For any arbitrary set A, let P(A) denote the power set of 

A. For any two arbitrary sets X and Y, let {X → Y} ≜

{f | f : X → Y} denote the class of all functions mapping inputs in X to outputs in Y.Let V be a finite vocabulary of tokens, |V | < ∞, and let L ∈ N denote a maximum length. Language is de-fined as the space of all possible token sequences consisting of no more than L tokens, L ≜ LS

> n=1

V n. Abstractly, any language model is a stochastic function f : L → ∆( L)

mapping input language (a prompt) to a distribution over possible output language, which is then sampled to yield a response. More broadly, modern language agents are of-ten endowed with tools that can provide dedicated access to privileged information (e.g., search or database query APIs) or functionality (e.g., document and image processing APIs); regardless, however, the inputs to such tools originate in language provided by the agent and the corresponding outputs must ultimately be textualized before being returned. Thus, it suffices to let F ≜ {L → ∆( L)} denote the set of all possible modules for designing a language agent. We formalize an agent template as a directed, acyclic graph (DAG) G = ( V, E) where vertices V ⊆ F are either LLMs or tools and edges E = V × V denote connections between these vertices. The parents of any vertex v ∈ V in G can be defined by a function Γ : V → P (V) which yields all other vertices in G associated with an edge directed to v,

Γ( v) ≜ {v′ ∈ V | (v′, v ) ∈ E} . The initial or root vertices of G are defined as those exclusively appearing in edges where they are the tail or source, R ≜ {v ∈ V | ∄(v′, v ) ∈E, ∀v′ ∈ V} ⊂ V . Conversely, the terminal vertices of G

are those only appearing in edges where they are the head or destination, T ≜ {v ∈ V | ∄(v, v ′) ∈ E , ∀v′ ∈ V} ⊂ V .Intuitively, an individual agent template specifies a collec-tion of one or more LLMs and tools as well as the execution order and flow of data between those modules. For any input ℓ ∈ L , initial vertices r ∈ R could be executed in parallel right away while any subsequent module v ∈ V \ R 

could only be called once the outputs of all its parents in 

Γ( v) are available as input. In order to guarantee a sensible execution path, we assume that G is not only acyclic but also weakly connected such that, by treating all edges in 

E as undirected, any pair of vertices in V are connected by at least one path. For ease of exposition, we always think of an agent template G as consuming a single input ℓ ∈ L ;when needed, we will accommodate multiple language in-puts by interpreting them as being concatenated together to form the single ℓ, which is then passed through G and can be decomposed by the constituent LLMs as needed. Simi-larly, the overall number of outputs for an agent template can be determined by the number of terminal vertices, |T | .As LLMs are straightforward input-output mappings, this infrastructure for handling multiple inputs or outputs may seem unnecessary. Importantly, however, the subsequent examples we present of templates derived from cognitive model and AI algorithms will sometimes require consum-ing, updating, and emitting additional stateful information or metadata. For example, an agent template attempting to emulate count-based exploration for RL agents would need to consume additional language outlining existing count information, potentially update the counts based on recent visitation, and then output the updated count information for use by the language agent in the next time period. In contrast to prior works on modular DAG for-malisms (Thomas, 2011; Weber et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2019; 2021), an agent template is simply a vehicle for ex-pressing possible language agent designs. We now show that inspiration for such templates can come from existing cognitive models (Section 4) and AI algorithms (Section 5). 

# 4. Templates based on cognitive models 

Cognitive models are used by cognitive scientists to model how parts of the mind, including the brain, works. Each cog-nitive model represents a mechanistic hypothesis grounded in cognitive processes. They have the same inputs (e.g., psychological stimuli) and outputs (e.g., choices, reaction times) as humans, and are tested against collected human data. In each section below we highlight how cognitive models have been used to design agents in specific domains. 

4.1. Communication 

Linguistic communication has been long studied in cogni-tive science (Posner, 1989; Berm ´udez, 2014; Noveck, 2018). A key effort has been to develop cognitive models that cap-ture communicative choices that people make (de Saussure, 1916; Shannon, 1948; Grice, 1957; 1975; Lewis, 1969; Stal-naker, 1978). One of the most prominent such models is the Rational Speech Acts (RSA) (Frank & Goodman, 2012; Goodman & Frank, 2016; Degen, 2023), which views com-munication as a rational choice between multiple utterances with corresponding utilities (Simon, 1955). Within this framework, listeners and speakers engage in recursive social inference, reasoning about each other’s beliefs in order to de-cide what to say. A common method of such reasoning is to imagine others’ reactions to each utterance choice (episodic future thinking; Atance & O’Neill, 2001). This capacity to project oneself into the future to pre-experience an event is closely linked to memory and past experiences (Szpunar, 2010; Schacter et al., 2007; Klein et al., 2010). 3Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

One paper that builds upon these ideas for LLMs is Liu et al. (2023), where the agent’s goal is to recommend an utterance for a user-provided communicative scenario. To do this, the agent first creates a list of advice, then generates utterance candidates based on combinations of advice, builds profiles of key audience groups, and finally simulates audience re-actions to candidates to find the best option, correspond-ing to the template V = {Λadvisor , Λgenerator , Λprofiler ,

Λsimulator , Λaggregator }. In this process, episodic future thinking is made explicit by simulating audiences’ reactions. This entire process falls within a single step of recursive social inference outlined in RSA, and outperforms baselines and ablations according to human judgments — represent-ing an adequate agent implementation of a cognitive model. Similarly, Qiu et al. (2025) applies RSA to improve the com-munication of LLMs in the reference game Wavelength. 1

The system generates a set of possible utterances given con-text from the LLM, uses separate LLM calls to evaluate the likelihood of context given each utterance, and samples the final utterance in a Bayes-rational way—also explicitly im-plementing mental simulation. This approach significantly improved the performance of a wide range of LLMs for both direct generation and chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022). Other papers have also borrowed ideas around recursive social inference. Kim et al. (2025) follow a Bayesian theory-of-mind approach, using LLMs to approximate probabilistic inference over agents’ mental states based on their percepts and actions. And Zhang et al. (2025c) investigated LLMs’ hierarchical social reasoning (i.e., higher order beliefs) fol-lowing classic psychological literature (Perner & Wimmer, 1985; Hedden & Zhang, 2002; Goodie et al., 2012). 

4.2. Reasoning and planning 

Reasoning is one of the oldest topics in the study of mind, going back at least to Aristotle (Aristotle, 1984). Cogni-tive science has explored many different aspects of reason-ing (Holyoak & Morrison, 2005; Kahneman, 2011; Tenen-baum et al., 2011; Evans & Over, 2013), including intuitive theories (Gerstenberg & Tenenbaum, 2017; Ullman et al., 2017), judgments (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974; Gilovich et al., 2002), problem solving (Newell & Simon, 1972; Halpern, 2013), and counterfactuals (Byrne, 2005; Ger-stenberg, 2024). A key methodological tool for studying human reasoning is the verbal protocol or “think aloud” method (Ericsson & Simon, 1993; Van Someren et al., 1994), in which participants verbalize their thought pro-cesses. Reasoning models like OpenAI o1 (OpenAI, 2024) and DeepSeek R1 (Guo et al., 2025) trained with long chain of thought by reinforcement learning, which follows the simple V = {Λreasoning } template, may be viewed as a par-ticular manifestation of the principles behind such verbal 

> 1wikipedia.org/wiki/Wavelength_(game)

protocols. Recent work has begun to explore how human reasoning traces can inform and improve LLM reasoning (and vice versa), especially given that LLMs themselves can help scale human verbal data collection (Xie et al., 2024; Wurgaft et al., 2025; de Varda et al., 2025). For example, Kargupta et al. (2025) provide a categorization of elements of reasoning grounded in cognitive science literature and identifies gaps and shortcomings in LLMs’ reasoning traces. Planning is a cornerstone capability for intelligent agents, without which one cannot accomplish complex goals (Rus-sell & Norvig, 2020). In cognitive science, planning is typically viewed as a kind of reasoning—reasoning about what to do (Miller et al., 1960; Bratman, 1987). Webb et al. (2025) show how an agent template based on cognitive modeling can improve planning with language agents. Their proposed Modular Agentic Planner (MAP) has six modules, which are responsible for task decom-position, action proposal, error monitoring, state predic-tion, and task coordination and correspond to the template 

V = {Λdecomposer , Λactor , Λmonitor , Λpredictor , Λevaluator ,

Λorchestrator }. Each module, implemented by an LLM, takes inspirations from how the prefrontal cortex is be-lieved to function—a brain region generally involved in deci-sion making and planning. The combined planner achieves strong results on multi-step problem solving benchmarks such as Tower of Hanoi and PlanBench. Additionally, MAP has a tree search component for action selection, drawing on a large body of research has used approximate search al-gorithms to model human planning (Ho et al., 2022; Mattar & Lengyel, 2022; Van Opheusden et al., 2023; Collins et al., 2025). We explicitly discuss agent templates derived from search algorithms in Sec. 5.1.1 below. 

4.3. Representation 

Cognitive science has used symbolic representations to de-scribe human mental processes (Boole, 1854; Fodor, 1975; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Newell, 1994), although how such representations are implemented is still debated (Lake et al., 2017; Santoro et al., 2021; Griffiths et al., 2025). The mod-ern interpretation of the “Language of Thought” (LoT) hy-pothesis posits that many aspects of thinking and learning can be modeled as writing and executing code in some general-purpose programming language (Goodman et al., 2014; Rule, 2020; Quilty-Dunn et al., 2023). In other words, the mind might contain operations like variable manipula-tion, conditional branching, and recursions, and can leverage appropriate data structures and algorithms in response to task demands. Programs provide more versatile and flex-ible representations of knowledge and skills compared to other formalisms like logical formulas and graphical models (Goodman et al., 2016; Chollet, 2019; Griffiths et al., 2024). This approach has been used to characterize a wide range of human cognitive behaviors, such as concept learning 4Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

(Goodman et al., 2008; Piantadosi, 2011; Yang & Pianta-dosi, 2022) and commonsense reasoning (Wong et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Ying et al., 2025; Wong et al., 2025). Language agents have demonstrated the power of pro-gramming languages as a general representational device. Most agent frameworks using these techniques can be described by the template V = {Λreasoner , Λinterpreter },where Λreasoner is an LLM that generates code (possibly along with natural language), and Λinterpreter is a system that executes the code. Some of the first works that in-structs LLMs to write programs to reason include PaL (Gao et al., 2023) and Program of Thoughts (Chen et al., 2023b): instead of having the LLM carry out reasoning in natural language, a code snippet is generated and the execution result becomes the answer. These approaches provide sig-nificant performance gains on mathematical, financial, and symbolic reasoning tasks. The CodeAct agent design (Wang et al., 2024b) demonstrates that for tasks where an LLM agent needs to interact with some external environment (e.g., calling API tools or navigating embodied environments), using programs to represent actions delivers performance gains over alternative text or JSON representations (cf. Yao et al., 2023b). Chain of Code (Li et al., 2023) proposes that LLM-generated code does not need to be fully defined to be effective—functions like detecting sarcasm can be emu-lated by the same LLM (in this case the template includes another Λemulator ). More recently, the CodeAdapt frame-work (Zhang et al., 2025a) shows that instruct LLMs plus multi-turn code use can outperform their reasoning-trained counterparts (e.g., DeepSeek V3 vs. R1) over a diverse range of tasks such as instruction following and creativity tests, while increasing token efficiency. These results illustrate that program representations can be just as effective for de-signing language agents as they are for describing aspects of human cognition. 

# 5. Templates from AI Algorithms 

Existing AI algorithms provide tested solutions to many of the problems faced by language agents, and hence a source of agent templates. We break down our analysis into two categories—classic AI algorithms, and more recent work based on reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. 

5.1. Templates from Classic Algorithms 

5.1.1. S EARCH 

The historical “good, old-fashioned AI“ period in artifi-cial intelligence research was characterized by the repre-sentation of real-world entities as symbols and the use of graphical or tree search to construct intelligent systems (Mc-Carthy et al., 1955; Newell & Simon, 1956). A search algorithm identifies a strategy for traversing a graph (where the edges correspond to actions or search operators and the nodes correspond to intermediate states) to identify a so-lution. Breadth-first search (Moore, 1959) and depth-first search (Tarjan, 1972) naturally proceed with breadth-first and depth-first traversals of the graph, respectively. Extend-ing Dijkstra’s Algorithm (Dijkstra, 1959), A∗ search (Hart et al., 1968) identifies a minimum cost path between speci-fied start and end states while using an admissible heuristic to prioritize which (partial) paths are explored first. Beam search (Lowerre, 1976; Rubin & Reddy, 1977) extends best-first search (Pohl, 1970; Pearl, 1985), which greedily looks for a minimum-cost path according to a heuristic and im-proves memory efficiency by only retaining the top-ranked candidates in its so-called “beam” after each expansion. Agent templates derived from search algorithms implement and orchestrate components for node expansion and eval-uation as language modules in order to solve a variety of search problems. For LLM inference, a standard approach for boosting accuracy on supervised-learning tasks is chain-of-thought prompting. One interpretation of this question-reasoning-answering process is that each individual question induces a graph where nodes represent partial computations or solutions. In this light, standard chain-of-thought prompt-ing can be seen as greedy best-first search with respect to some unknown, latent heuristic codified into the underlying LLM over the course of pre-training and fine-tuning. An alternative choice is to externalize this heuristic search process and make it explicit in the agent’s choices for which partial solution to expand further and how to value the resulting modifications. This exact process was formal-ized through the Tree of Thoughts framework (Yao et al., 2023a), which concretely leverages two distinct LLMs for generating possible reasoning extensions from a current partial solution as well as evaluating the quality of progres-sion towards a solution from an incomplete search state: 

V = {Λgenerator , Λevaluator }. Here, one may interpret the graphical structure given by the agent template as a repre-sentation of input-output processing during a single iteration of the search algorithm. Yao et al. (2023a) presented and evaluated two separate agent templates, varying the under-lying classic search algorithm — breadth-first search or depth-first search — used to govern the logic around which LLM is called on what search state. In a similar attempt to enhance the reasoning capabilities of language agents, Xie et al. (2023) leverage an agent design inspired by (stochas-tic) beam search, where the two generation and evaluation LLMs are further complemented by a third “correctness” LLM whose resulting assessment of partial reasoning step’s correctness is then used to determine priority within the beam search that iteratively prunes less-promising reasoning chains from consideration. Moving beyond the reasoning capabilities problem to general exploration of multi-modal agents within web interfaces, Koh et al. (2025) offer an 5Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

instantiation of Tree of Thoughts utilizing the A∗ search algorithm and with novel application of multi-modal mod-els (for processing both language and visual features of websites) for state expansion and evaluation. We conclude this section by mentioning a final search algo-rithm of increasing popularity and ubiquity: Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Coulom, 2006; Browne et al., 2012). Each iteration of MCTS consists of four steps: (1) selection of a node for further search using a designated choice of tree policy, (2) expansion of the selected node by selecting one more actions from the particular state, (3) simulation from a newly expanded state to a terminal state, and (4) backpropagation of value information to all incident states between the path from root to terminal state. Modeling the selection and expansion phases as a multi-armed ban-dit problem (Lattimore & Szepesv ´ari, 2020) and taking inspiration from upper-confidence methods for provably-efficient bandit exploration (Auer, 2002), a widely adopted choice of tree policy is Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT) (Kocsis & Szepesv ´ari, 2006) that selects based on mean reward estimates along with a carefully-calibrated additive reward bonus. Notably, while many papers take advantage of the MCTS algorithm explicitly (Hao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a; Luo et al., 2025a; Guan et al., 2025), there seems to be a lack of lan-guage agents utilizing templates derived from the MCTS algorithm itself. Given the success of MCTS in complex domains like Go and chess (Silver et al., 2016; Schrittwieser et al., 2020), future work may find an MCTS-inspired agent template useful. 5.1.2. D IVIDE AND CONQUER 

Divide and Conquer is an important strategy in computer science and underlies many foundational algorithms (Smith, 1985; Dasgupta et al., 2008; Cormen et al., 2022). The basic idea is to breaking a problem into subproblems, solving the subproblems and aggregating the answers. This process can be recursive, meaning that subproblems can be further decomposed into smaller parts. Classic examples include Merge Sort, Strassen matrix multiplication, and Fast Fourier Transform (Dasgupta et al., 2008). For example, Merge Sort breaks sorting a list down to sorting two elements and then merging all the way up, yielding an O(n log n) solution. For language agents, Divide and Conquer typically means breaking a given problem down to smaller pieces that are solved by the same or different agents before aggregating the answers. A paradigmatic prompting-based approach following this strategy is Least-to-Most prompting (Zhou et al., 2022)—it uses an LLM to explicitly decompose a complex problem into a sequence of simpler subproblems that build upon one another, and then uses the same LLM iteratively solves each subproblem with solutions to earlier subproblems appended to context. For example, an LLM can solve the simple problem “Alisa has 5 apples. Ben has 2 more apples than Alisa. How many apples do they have together?” by solving the subproblems “How many apples does Ben have?” and “How many apples do they have together?”. This approach can be formulated as the template V = {Λdecomposer , Λsolver }. Similarly, Decom-posed Prompting (Khot et al., 2022) introduces a modular framework where subtasks can be recursively decomposed and some subtasks can be accomplished via tool use such as a symbolic retriever. Explicit merge steps are applied here, so V = {Λdecomposer , Λsolver , Λaggregator } represents the template. These approaches can improve performance over symbolic reasoning and question answering domains, especially comparing to chain-of-thought prompting. Given the foundational status of the Divide-and-Conquer strategy in algorithm design, it is perhaps no surprise that there is a body of work that applies it to domains that include code generation (Zelikman et al., 2023) image generation (Wang et al., 2024f), and virtual environments (Prasad et al., 2024). Beyond problem decomposition with a single underlying LLM, other work has explored using specialized models or agents for different subproblem. HuggingGPT (Shen et al., 2023) employs a controller LLM that decomposes a user re-quest into subtasks, assigns each to an AI model (e.g., vision, speech) on HugginFace according to their description, and summarize the response accordingly. This allows the sys-tem work with multi-modal tasks and problems effectively. Divide-and-conquer agent templates have demonstrated con-sistent improvements over single-shot approaches. However, many of the Divide and Conquer approaches were proposed before the creation of modern reasoning models (OpenAI, 2024; Guo et al., 2025) and the maturation of long-running agents that operate in a multi-turn fashion (Yao et al., 2023b; Wang et al., 2024b; Feng et al., 2025; Jin et al., 2025). This is partly because it has been empirically demonstrated that reasoning models and reasoning-enabled agents can often decompose and solve subtasks on their own (e.g., Gandhi et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2024a). A research frontier is thus how to apply explicit Divide and Conquer templates to the new generation of models for finishing tasks more robustly and solving longer-horizon problems. 

5.2. Templates from RL Algorithms 

5.2.1. P OLICY ITERATION 

Many of the problems language agents are designed to solve can be expressed as sequential decision-making problem formulated as a finite-horizon, episodic Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Bellman, 1957; Puterman, 1994) where the state-action space is entirely represented in natural language and all rewards are bounded. Consequently, reinforcement learning algorithms provide a rich source of agent templates. 6Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

To the best of our knowledge, one of the earliest applications of an agent template derived from a RL algorithm came in the form of In-Context Policy Iteration (ICPI) (Brooks et al., 2023). Recall that classic policy iteration (PI) (Howard, 1960) leverages dynamic programming (Bertsekas, 2012) and assumes access to the true MDP reward function and transition function. PI then proceeds iteratively, begin-ning with some initial policy π : S → A and alter-nating between two steps. First, there is policy evalu-ation to compute the action-value function induced by the current policy Qπ (s, a ). Second, there is greedy pol-icy improvement such that the next policy π′ is defined as π′(s) = arg max 

> a∈A

Qπ (s, a ). Bounded rewards imply the existence of at least one deterministic optimal policy 

π⋆(s) = arg max 

> a∈A

Q⋆(s, a ) and, for the tabular MDPs PI was originally designed for, a finite state-action space guar-antees a finite number of policies to iterate over for achiev-ing global convergence. In order to implement PI with LLMs, Brooks et al. (2023) derived an agent template consisting of three LLMs, V =

{Λpolicy , Λtransition , Λreward }. Relaxing the assumption that the language agent has perfect access to the true environ-ment, ICPI complements the policy LLM, Λpolicy , needed for PI with two additional LLMs, Λtransition and Λreward ,for approximating the underlying MDP transition and re-ward function, respectively. The edge structure for the agent template first uses the history of interactions thus far to es-timate the recent Λpolicy for subsequent policy evaluation. Concretely, the H Bellman backups needed for policy eval-uation are “unrolled” using the requisite copies of V. As its name suggests, ICPI uses the full history to prompt all LLMs via in-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020) and approximate either the MDP model or the most recently executed policy based on collected trajectories. Once pol-icy evaluation is complete, the output is an action greedily chosen based on the collective LLM estimate of Qπ (s, ·).ICPI was evaluated across six different MDPs with small state-action spaces and found to perform as well (if not better) than classic tabular Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992), a fixed rule-based policy searching over all past tra-jectories, and a random policy performing policy evaluation but not selecting actions via greedy policy improvement. 5.2.2. P OSTERIOR SAMPLING FOR RL One tractable, statistically-efficient approach to addressing the exploration challenge in RL is to proceed in a Bayesian fashion and sample from the (approximate) posterior dis-tribution over the true underlying MDP. The Bayesian RL setting acknowledges that the environment reward function and transition function are unknown to the decision-maker and, therefore, constitute random variables in the mind of the agent (Ghavamzadeh et al., 2015). Beginning with some ini-tial, well-specified prior distribution over MDPs, Bayesian RL methods aim to synthesize the Bayes-optimal policy that always strikes the best trade-off between exploration and exploitation. Unfortunately, save for a few tractable cases (Gittins, 1974; 1979; Arumugam & Singh, 2022), the corresponding Bayes-Adaptive MDP (Bellman & Kalaba, 1959) that encapsulates this Bayesian sequential decision-making problem is intractable to solve exactly (Duff, 2002). To approximately engage with the Bayesian RL problem in a computationally-tractable manner, the RL literature has con-verged upon posterior-sampling methods that incrementally update posterior beliefs over the underlying MDP. One such algorithm is known as Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement Learning (PSRL; Strens, 2000). At each episode, PSRL draws one sample from the current posterior distribution over the true MDP as a statistically-plausible hypothesis for the unknown environment. PSRL employs Thompson Sampling (Thompson, 1933; Russo et al., 2018) as the mechanism for driving exploration by acting opti-mally with respect to the posterior sample as if it reflects reality. Given a fully-specified reward function and transi-tion function, any planning algorithm can be used to obtain the optimal policy for this posterior sample, which is then executed for the duration of the episode in the actual environ-ment. The resulting trajectory of experience is a sequence of ground-truth observations from the true reward and transi-tion functions used to perform a posterior update before the next episode. Despite a lack of empirical support outside of tabular MDPs (Osband et al., 2013; Osband & Van Roy, 2017), PSRL admits elegant theoretical guarantees under various performance criteria (both frequentist as well as Bayesian regret upper bounds) and structural assumptions on the environment, along with a variety of algorithmic ex-tensions (Osband et al., 2013; Osband & Van Roy, 2016; 2017; Lu & Van Roy, 2019; Arumugam & Van Roy, 2022). An agent template for PSRL was introduced by Aru-mugam & Griffiths (2025) consisting of three LLMs V =

{Λsample , Λpolicy , Λposterior }. In lieu of the true Bayesian posterior over MDPs, a compromise of statistical rigor in exchange for tractability was made with a verbal “poste-rior,” summarizing what knowledge the agent currently has and what (task-relevant) uncertainty about the environment remains. In each episode, the resulting LLM-based PSRL agent uses the current “posterior” to generate one plausi-ble text description of the underlying MDP with Λsample ,deploys the optimal policy for the hypothesized MDP via 

Λpolicy , and finally updates the “posterior” with Λposterior 

to reflect new knowledge as well as residual epistemic uncer-tainty at the end of an episode. Notably, this agent template does not only consume the current state at each timestep but also carries the verbal “posterior” as an additional input and output, providing the consistent algorithmic state needed for 7Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

all the constituent modules in the template. Just as PSRL is known for gracefully handling a variety of hard-exploration problems, experiments confirm that a language agent designed with the corresponding PSRL tem-plate retains the efficient exploration of the original algo-rithm. Whereas ICPI assumes that the requisite data needed to facilitate accurate model estimation via ICL has already been collected, Arumugam & Griffiths (2025) present cu-mulative regret curves confirming that this agent template can succeed without such an assumption in difficult natural-language tasks like Wordle (Lokshtanov & Subercaseaux, 2022; Klissarov et al., 2025). 5.2.3. I NFORMATION -D IRECTED SAMPLING 

While PSRL is one example of a statistically-efficient RL algorithm, its dependence on Thompson Sampling as the underlying exploration mechanism leaves room for improve-ment. As Thompson Sampling only ever proceeds by an agent acting optimally with respect to current posterior be-liefs, it never permits the execution of actions which are deliberately sub-optimal solely for the purpose of gaining information. For example, consider a mail-delivery robot tasked with delivering a package to a new building. PSRL, by leveraging Thompson Sampling, would have this agent spend each episode trying to deliver the package to a new, untested office that has some prior probability of being cor-rect. In contrast, an alternative exploration strategy would be to invest an episode visiting the building directory which, while never part of an optimal trajectory, yields all informa-tion needed for behaving optimally thereafter. To remedy this deficiency, Russo & Van Roy (2018) pro-pose an algorithmic-design principle known as Information-Directed Sampling (IDS) to accommodate incurring some amount of regret when it yields sufficient information gain. Formally, this is achieved by optimizing for a policy in each time period that strikes a particular balance (specifically, the so-called information ratio (Russo & Van Roy, 2016)) between expected regret and information gain. As informa-tion gain is quantified by the mutual information between observed experience and optimal actions, which is difficult to compute exactly in general, concrete instantiations of IDS proceed by identifying suitable upper bounds to the infor-mation ratio that can be minimized instead to synthesize a behavior policy for each time period. Extensions of IDS be-yond the multi-armed bandit setting (Lu et al., 2023) further require some mechanism for handling non-myopic informa-tion gain that may only be obtained by perseverating and deliberately incurring regret across multiple time periods in sequence. Assuming that a suitable surrogate to the informa-tion ratio is obtainable, practical instantiations of IDS may then leverage convenient facts from convex analysis (Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004) to solve the corresponding policy optimization problem. While computational efforts with IDS have been restricted to multi-armed bandit problems and smaller-scale MDPs (Lu et al., 2023), Arumugam & Griffiths (2025) outline an agent template directly inspired by IDS. Keeping the machinery of the PSRL agent template for updating a verbal “poste-rior,” the IDS agent template uses two additional LLMs 

V = {Λregret , Λinfo gain , Λposterior }. Instead of selecting actions via posterior sampling, LLMs Λregret and Λinfo gain 

are prompted to numerically score each action in the cur-rent state with an estimate of expected regret and (instanta-neous) information gain. For a MDP with K ∈ N actions, the 2K LLM-generated values are then used to solve the information-ratio optimization problem of Russo & Van Roy (2018), resulting in a probability distribution from which the current action is sampled. Theoretical results as well as empirical work on IDS sug-gests that a suitable instantiation should perform just as well as Thompson Sampling, if not better. For a prelim-inary investigation in a simpler, numerical variant of the Wordle game, Arumugam & Griffiths (2025) find that lan-guage agents implemented with the corresponding PSRL and IDS templates also preserve this ordering. In particu-lar, while correct guesses for unknown numbers in a target code (rather than a target word, as in traditional Wordle) encumber a LLM-based PSRL agent, a LLM-based IDS agent freely tests all unknown digits before proceeding to explore possible combinations among correct digits; notably, this results in a closer approximation to the Bayes-optimal policy than what the LLM-based PSRL agent could achieve. As the empirical study conducted by Arumugam & Griffiths (2025) for IDS was preliminary and limited to a single do-main, much remains to be seen and understood about the effectiveness of the proposed IDS agent template. 

# 6. Discussion 

The preceding sections demonstrate how agent templates derived from existing cognitive models or AI algorithms— boasting improved interpretability over arbitrary designs— have already begun to percolate in existing language agents. We discuss alternative views below and provide a call to action for further exploring the potential of this approach. 

6.1. Alternative Views 

Our advocacy for agent templates derived from cognitive models and existing AI algorithms may be met with a num-ber of reservations, a few of which we address directly here. One alternative position is that we should not invest effort in the general framework of agent templates and instead iden-tify a single best template or agent design pattern. While doing so could bear fruit for some suitably-scoped distri-8Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

bution of tasks, the No Free Lunch Theorem (Wolpert & Macready, 1995; 1997) would imply such a strategy would not be fruitful for all tasks; the precise advantage of hav-ing a generic framework of various agent templates is the ability to employ a range of inductive biases suitable to the problem(s) at hand. Our work highlights that a long list of successful pairings between problems and inductive biases has been developed through the literature on cogni-tive science and AI. We can also make an analogy to the landscape of LLMs themselves—instead of searching for a single “best” model, the field recognizes that different kinds of models (in terms of size, modality, architecture, and reasoning) can serve different purposes and use cases. We expect agentic system design to follow a similar pattern. Another perspective takes no issue with agent templates per se but may posit that LLMs represent a fundamental paradigm shift whereby language agents composed of LLMs face tasks which demand novel templates. We note that, if such a shift does exist, it has yet to make itself apparent in the agents of today; for example, all agents examined in this work for sequential decision-making problems are still RL agents facing some (possibly partially-observable) Markov decision process. Fundamentally, language agents are built to fulfill goals and tasks that cognitive science and AI have long identified (e.g., answering questions, solving hard problems, and interacting with humans). Accepting the premise of this position, we argue that it would still be prudent to first appeal to the wealth of existing templates at our disposal from cognitive science and AI. Doing so would be commensurate with mapping out the manifold of agent designs for tasks of interest thereby highlighting the frontier (if it exists) where novel templates are warranted. Finally, one may eschew templates inspired by cognitive science and AI in favor of those automatically discovered and generated by LLMs or language agents themselves. While this approach has gained some worthwhile traction (Hu et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b), those settings are still ones in which cognitive models and AI algorithms may still serve effectively as good starting points or “priors” for subsequent design evolution and discovery. Moreover, such designs may further allow us to port over prioritization and preference schemes between the cognitive science or AI-inspired templates themselves; that is, if algorithm A is known to be preferred over algorithm B for a particular class of problem, then one may naturally anticipate the same relation to hold between language agents designed with template A versus template B (see Section 5.2.3 for one such example). Thus, a laissez-faire approach to agent design may not only sacrifice interpretability but also a wealth of prior knowledge about the relative performance of competing language agents. It is also worth noting that it is possible that such an approach would likely converge on certain agent templates that are highly similar to some cognitive models or AI algorithms. We support this claim by analogy to deep learning, where practitioners are faced with an equally (if not more) onerous challenge of designing effective neural network architectures. The deep learning literature gradually converged upon cer-tain staple architectures and design patterns composed of elements from the same core set of building blocks (such as convolutional layers, GRUs, LSTMs, residual blocks, and Transformers). While such designs are not guaranteed to be optimal for any problem of interest, they specify a highly-structured manifold in the space of possible architec-tures with a demonstrable track record of general reliability across a wide range of problems. Even when formulating the problem of searching over neural network architectures in terms of optimization, researchers still operate within the boundaries defined by these atomic units (Zoph & Le, 2017), often inspired by or related to intuitions from psychology (for example, CNNs and the visual representations in the brain; the concepts of memory and attention). 

6.2. Call to action 

In this position paper, we have argued that cognitive models and AI algorithms provide effective templates for designing LLM-based agents. Growing together as overlapping fields, cognitive science and AI have respectively developed an abundant collection of ingenious and time-tested computa-tional models and algorithms. As we highlight throughout the paper, many of them have been applied to successful language agent design. 

We call for researchers to investigate the many other models and algorithms in this space. Examples include hypothesis generation and learning (Dasgupta et al., 2017; Rule et al., 2024), information-theoretic principles in lan-guage (Zaslavsky et al., 2018; Gibson et al., 2019), and evo-lutionary algorithms (Yu & Gen, 2010; Pugh et al., 2016). Increasingly, use cases for language agents demand more than completing standalone tasks—they may interact and collaborate with human users, groups of users, or other AI agents (Collins et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025). So, it is conceivable that methods developed in fields that study multi-agent systems and collective decision making (such as economics and computational social science) can well serve as useful templates; among those are voting algorithms (Conitzer et al., 2024), mechanism design concepts (Duet-ting et al., 2024), and game-theoretic models (Sun et al., 2025). Finally, language agents based on rich, interesting templates may in turn lead to novel or more general cogni-tive models. Most cognitive models have been limited to working within relatively simple experimental conditions, whereas the open-ended nature of language agents can allow cognitive scientists to predict and explain human thoughts and behaviors in wider and more realistic domains. 9Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by funds provided by the National Science Foundation and by DoD OUSD (R & E) under Cooperative Agreement PHY-2229929 (the NSF AI Insti-tute for Artificial and Natural Intelligence) and by ONR MURI N00014-24-1-2748. We thank Will Cunningham for conversations and thoughtful feedback on the manuscript. 

# References 

Agrawal, L. A., Tan, S., Soylu, D., Ziems, N., Khare, R., Opsahl-Ong, K., Singhvi, A., Shandilya, H., Ryan, M. J., Jiang, M., et al. GEPA: Reflective Prompt Evolution Can Outperform Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.19457 , 2025. Ahn, M., Brohan, A., Brown, N., Chebotar, Y., Cortes, O., David, B., Finn, C., Fu, C., Gopalakrishnan, K., Hausman, K., et al. Do as I can, not as I say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 ,2022. Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P., Schul-man, J., and Man ´e, D. Concrete problems in AI safety. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016. Anthropic. Claude 3.7 Sonnet and Claude Code, February 2025. URL https://www.anthropic.com/ne ws/claude-3-7-sonnet .Aristotle. Prior analytics. In Barnes, J. (ed.), The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation , vol-ume 1. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1984. Arumugam, D. and Griffiths, T. L. Toward Efficient Explo-ration by Large Language Model Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20997 , 2025. Arumugam, D. and Singh, S. Planning to the Information Horizon of BAMDPs via Epistemic State Abstraction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 35, 2022. Arumugam, D. and Van Roy, B. Deciding What to Model: Value-Equivalent Sampling for Reinforcement Learning. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 9024–9044, 2022. Atance, C. M. and O’Neill, D. K. Episodic future thinking. 

Trends in cognitive sciences , 5(12):533–539, 2001. Auer, P. Using Confidence Bounds for Exploitation-Exploration Trade-Offs. The Journal of Machine Learn-ing Research , 3:397–422, 2002. Bellman, R. A Markovian Decision Process. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics , pp. 679–684, 1957. Bellman, R. and Kalaba, R. On Adaptive Control Processes. 

IRE Transactions on Automatic Control , 4(2):1–9, 1959. Berm ´udez, J. L. Cognitive science: An introduction to the science of the mind . Cambridge University Press, 2014. Bertsekas, D. P. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Con-trol . Athena Scientific, 2012. Boole, G. An investigation of the Laws of Thought . Walton & Maberly, 1854. Boyd, S. and Vandenberghe, L. Convex Optimization . Cam-bridge University Press, 2004. Bratman, M. Intention, plans, and practical reason . Harvard University Press, 1987. Brooks, E., Walls, L., Lewis, R. L., and Singh, S. Large Language Models can Implement Policy Iteration. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 30349–30366, 2023. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33: 1877–1901, 2020. Browne, C. B., Powley, E., Whitehouse, D., Lucas, S. M., Cowling, P. I., Rohlfshagen, P., Tavener, S., Perez, D., Samothrakis, S., and Colton, S. A Survey of Monte Carlo Tree Search Methods. IEEE Transactions on Computa-tional Intelligence and AI in Games , 4(1):1–43, 2012. Byrne, R. M. The rational imagination: How people create alternatives to reality . MIT Press, 2005. Cemri, M., Pan, M. Z., Yang, S., Agrawal, L. A., Chopra, B., Tiwari, R., Keutzer, K., Parameswaran, A., Klein, D., Ramchandran, K., et al. Why do multi-agent LLM systems fail? arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13657 , 2025. Chang, M., Gupta, A., Levine, S., and Griffiths, T. L. Auto-matically Composing Representation Transformations as a Means for Generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Chang, M., Kaushik, S., Levine, S., and Griffiths, T. Modu-larity in Reinforcement Learning via Algorithmic Inde-pendence in Credit Assignment. In International Confer-ence on Machine Learning , pp. 1452–1462, 2021. Chen, B., Shu, C., Shareghi, E., Collier, N., Narasimhan, K., and Yao, S. Fireact: Toward language agent fine-tuning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05915 , 2023a. 10 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Chen, W., Ma, X., Wang, X., and Cohen, W. W. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023b. Chollet, F. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547 , 2019. Collins, K. M., Sucholutsky, I., Bhatt, U., Chandra, K., Wong, L., Lee, M., Zhang, C. E., Zhi-Xuan, T., Ho, M., Mansinghka, V., et al. Building machines that learn and think with people. Nature Human Behaviour , 8(10):1851– 1863, 2024. Collins, K. M., Zhang, C. E., Wong, L., da Costa, M. B., Todd, G., Weller, A., Cheyette, S. J., Griffiths, T. L., and Tenenbaum, J. B. People use fast, flat goal-directed simulation to reason about novel problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11503 , 2025. Conitzer, V., Freedman, R., Heitzig, J., Holliday, W. H., Ja-cobs, B. M., Lambert, N., Moss ´e, M., Pacuit, E., Russell, S., Schoelkopf, H., et al. Social choice should guide ai alignment in dealing with diverse human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10271 , 2024. Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., and Stein, C. 

Introduction to Algorithms . MIT Press, 4th edition, 2022. Coulom, R. Efficient Selectivity and Backup Operators in Monte-Carlo Tree Search. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computers and Games , pp. 72–83, 2006. Cui, W., Zhang, J., Li, Z., Sun, H., Lopez, D., Das, K., Malin, B. A., and Kumar, S. Automatic prompt opti-mization via heuristic search: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18746 , 2025. Dasgupta, I., Schulz, E., and Gershman, S. J. Where do hypotheses come from? Cognitive Psychology , 96:1–25, 2017. Dasgupta, S., Papadimitriou, C. H., and Vazirani, U. Algo-rithms . McGraw-Hill Education, 2008. de Saussure, F. Course in General Linguistics . Columbia University Press, 1916. de Varda, A. G., D’Elia, F. P., Kean, H., Lampinen, A., and Fedorenko, E. The cost of thinking is similar between large reasoning models and humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(47):e2520077122, 2025. Decagon. Decagon — conversational ai for customer expe-rience, 2026. URL https://decagon.ai/ .Degen, J. The rational speech act framework. Annual Review of Linguistics , 9:519–540, 2023. Dijkstra, E. W. A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs. Numerische Mathematik , 1:269–271, 1959. Driess, D., Xia, F., Sajjadi, M. S., Lynch, C., Chowdhery, A., Ichter, B., Wahid, A., Tompson, J., Vuong, Q., Yu, T., et al. PaLM-E: an embodied multimodal language model. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8469–8488, 2023. Duetting, P., Mirrokni, V., Paes Leme, R., Xu, H., and Zuo, S. Mechanism design for large language models. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pp. 144–155, 2024. Duff, M. O. Optimal Learning: Computational Procedures for Bayes-Adaptive Markov Decision Processes . PhD thesis, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2002. Dulac-Arnold, G., Mankowitz, D., and Hester, T. Chal-lenges of real-world reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12901 , 2019. Ericsson, K. A. and Simon, H. A. Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data . MIT press, 1993. Evans, J. S. B. and Over, D. E. Rationality and reasoning .Psychology Press, 2013. Feng, J., Huang, S., Qu, X., Zhang, G., Qin, Y., Zhong, B., Jiang, C., Chi, J., and Zhong, W. Retool: Reinforcement learning for strategic tool use in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11536 , 2025. Fodor, J. A. The Language of Thought . Harvard University Press, 1975. Frank, M. C. and Goodman, N. D. Predicting pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science , 334(6084):998– 998, 2012. Fu, W., Di, B., and Boulet, B. Batch reinforcement learning in the real world: A survey. In Offline RL Workshop (NeurIPS) , pp. 1–13, 2020. Gandhi, K., Chakravarthy, A., Singh, A., Lile, N., and Goodman, N. D. Cognitive behaviors that enable self-improving reasoners, or, four habits of highly effective stars. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01307 , 2025. Gao, L., Madaan, A., Zhou, S., Alon, U., Liu, P., Yang, Y., Callan, J., and Neubig, G. Pal: Program-aided lan-guage models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 10764–10799, 2023. Gerstenberg, T. Counterfactual simulation in causal cog-nition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 28(10):924–936, 2024. 11 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Gerstenberg, T. and Tenenbaum, J. B. Intuitive theories. In Waldmann, M. R. (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Causal Reasoning . Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2017. Ghavamzadeh, M., Mannor, S., Pineau, J., and Tamar, A. Bayesian Reinforcement Learning: A Survey. Founda-tions and Trends in Machine Learning , 8(5-6):359–483, 2015. Gibson, E., Futrell, R., Piantadosi, S. P., Dautriche, I., Ma-howald, K., Bergen, L., and Levy, R. How efficiency shapes human language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,23(5):389–407, 2019. Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., and Kahneman, D. Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment . Cambridge university press, 2002. Gittins, J. A Dynamic Allocation Index for the Sequential Design of Experiments. Progress in Statistics , pp. 241– 266, 1974. Gittins, J. Bandit Processes and Dynamic Allocation In-dices. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 41(2):148–164, 1979. Goodie, A. S., Doshi, P., and Young, D. L. Levels of theory-of-mind reasoning in competitive games. Journal of Be-havioral Decision Making , 25(1):95–108, 2012. Goodman, N. D. and Frank, M. C. Pragmatic language inter-pretation as probabilistic inference. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 20(11):818–829, 2016. Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., Feldman, J., and Grif-fiths, T. L. A rational analysis of rule-based concept learning. Cognitive Science , 32(1):108–154, 2008. Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gerstenberg, T. Concepts in a probabilistic language of thought. In Mar-golis, E. and Laurence, S. (eds.), The conceptual mind: New directions in the study of concepts , pp. 59–109. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2014. Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Contributors, T. P. Probabilistic Models of Cognition. http://probmo ds.org/v2 , 2016. Accessed: 2024-10-1. Grice, H. P. Meaning. Philosophical Review , 66(3):377– 388, 1957. Grice, H. P. Logic and conversation. In Speech acts , pp. 41–58. Brill, 1975. Griffiths, T. L., Chater, N., and Tenenbaum, J. B. Bayesian models of cognition: Reverse engineering the mind . MIT Press, 2024. Griffiths, T. L., Lake, B. M., McCoy, R. T., Pavlick, E., and Webb, T. W. Whither symbols in the era of advanced neu-ral networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05776 , 2025. Guan, X., Zhang, L. L., Liu, Y., Shang, N., Sun, Y., Zhu, Y., Yang, F., and Yang, M. rStar-Math: Small LLMs Can Master Math Reasoning with Self-Evolved Deep Thinking. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Guo, D., Yang, D., Zhang, H., Song, J., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Zhang, R., Ma, S., Bi, X., et al. DeepSeek-R1 incentivizes reasoning in LLMs through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638, 2025. Halpern, D. F. Thought and knowledge: An introduction to critical thinking . Psychology press, 2013. Hao, S., Gu, Y., Ma, H., Hong, J., Wang, Z., Wang, D., and Hu, Z. Reasoning with Language Model is Planning with World Model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 8154–8173, 2023. Hart, P. E., Nilsson, N. J., and Raphael, B. A Formal Basis for the Heuristic Determination of Minimum Cost Paths. 

IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics ,4(2):100–107, 1968. He, S., Narayan, A., Khare, I. S., Linderman, S. W., R ´e, C., and Biderman, D. An Information Theoretic Per-spective on Agentic System Design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21720 , 2025. Hedden, T. and Zhang, J. What do you think I think you think?: Strategic reasoning in matrix games. Cognition ,85(1):1–36, 2002. Ho, M. K., Abel, D., Correa, C. G., Littman, M. L., Cohen, J. D., and Griffiths, T. L. People construct simplified mental representations to plan. Nature , 606:129–136, 2022. Holyoak, K. J. and Morrison, R. G. (eds.). The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning . Cambridge Uni-versity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2005. Howard, R. A. Dynamic Programming and Markov Pro-cesses. MIT Press , 1960. Hu, S., Lu, C., and Clune, J. Automated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435 , 2024. Jin, B., Zeng, H., Yue, Z., Yoon, J., Arik, S., Wang, D., Zamani, H., and Han, J. Search-R1: Training LLMs to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 , 2025. 12 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Johnson-Laird, P. Mental models: Towards a cognitive sci-ence of language, inference, and consciousness . Harvard University Press, 1983. Kahneman, D. Thinking, fast and slow . macmillan, 2011. Kargupta, P., Li, S. S., Wang, H., Lee, J., Chen, S., Ahia, O., Light, D., Griffiths, T. L., Kleiman-Weiner, M., Han, J., et al. Cognitive Foundations for Reason-ing and Their Manifestation in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16660 , 2025. Karpas, E., Abend, O., Belinkov, Y., Lenz, B., Lieber, O., Ratner, N., Shoham, Y., Bata, H., Levine, Y., Leyton-Brown, K., et al. MRKL Systems: A modular, neuro-symbolic architecture that combines large language mod-els, external knowledge sources and discrete reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00445 , 2022. Kaufmann, T., Weng, P., Bengs, V., and H ¨ullermeier, E. A survey of reinforcement learning from human feedback. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14925 , 2023. Khattab, O., Singhvi, A., Maheshwari, P., Zhang, Z., San-thanam, K., Vardhamanan, S., Haq, S., Sharma, A., Joshi, T. T., Moazam, H., et al. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714 , 2023. Khot, T., Trivedi, H., Finlayson, M., Fu, Y., Richardson, K., Clark, P., and Sabharwal, A. Decomposed prompting: A modular approach for solving complex tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02406 , 2022. Kim, H., Sclar, M., Zhi-Xuan, T., Ying, L., Levine, S., Liu, Y., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Choi, Y. Hypothesis-driven theory-of-mind reasoning for large language mod-els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11881 , 2025. Klein, S. B., Robertson, T. E., and Delton, A. W. Facing the future: Memory as an evolved system for planning future acts. Memory & cognition , 38:13–22, 2010. Klissarov, M., Hjelm, R. D., Toshev, A. T., and Mazoure, B. On the Modeling Capabilities of Large Language Mod-els for Sequential Decision Making. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. Kocsis, L. and Szepesv ´ari, C. Bandit Based Monte-Carlo Planning. In Proceedings of the 17th European Confer-ence on Machine Learning , pp. 282–293, 2006. Koh, J. Y., McAleer, S. M., Fried, D., and Salakhutdinov, R. Tree Search for Language Model Agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. Lake, B. M., Ullman, T. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Gersh-man, S. J. Building machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 40:e253, 2017. Lattimore, T. and Szepesv ´ari, C. Bandit Algorithms . Cam-bridge University Press, 2020. Lewis, D. K. Convention: A Philosophical Study . John Wiley & Sons, 1969. Li, C., Liang, J., Zeng, A., Chen, X., Hausman, K., Sadigh, D., Levine, S., Fei-Fei, L., Xia, F., and Ichter, B. Chain of code: Reasoning with a language model-augmented code emulator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.04474 , 2023. Li, X., Zou, H., and Liu, P. Torl: Scaling tool-integrated rl. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23383 , 2025. Liu, B., Li, X., Zhang, J., Wang, J., He, T., Hong, S., Liu, H., Zhang, S., Song, K., Zhu, K., et al. Advances and challenges in foundation agents: From brain-inspired in-telligence to evolutionary, collaborative, and safe systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01990 , 2025a. Liu, R., Yen, H., Marjieh, R., Griffiths, T. L., and Krishna, R. Improving interpersonal communication by simu-lating audiences with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00687 , 2023. Liu, Z., Bai, X., Chen, K., Chen, X., Li, X., Xiang, Y., Liu, J., Li, H.-D., Wang, Y., Nie, L., et al. A survey on the feedback mechanism of llm-based ai agents. In Proceed-ings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp. 10582–10592. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, 2025b. Lokshtanov, D. and Subercaseaux, B. Wordle is NP-Hard. In 11th International Conference on Fun with Algorithms ,2022. Lowerre, B. T. The Harpy Speech Recognition System . PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 1976. Lu, C., Lu, C., Lange, R. T., Foerster, J., Clune, J., and Ha, D. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 ,2024. Lu, X. and Van Roy, B. Information-Theoretic Confidence Bounds for Reinforcement Learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019. Lu, X., Van Roy, B., Dwaracherla, V., Ibrahimi, M., Osband, I., and Wen, Z. Reinforcement Learning, Bit by Bit. 

Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 16(6):733– 865, 2023. 13 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Luo, H., Haihong, E., Guo, Y., Lin, Q., Wu, X., Mu, X., Liu, W., Song, M., Zhu, Y., and Luu, A. T. KBQA-o1: Agentic Knowledge Base Question Answering with Monte Carlo Tree Search. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025a. Luo, J., Zhang, W., Yuan, Y., Zhao, Y., Yang, J., Gu, Y., Wu, B., Chen, B., Qiao, Z., Long, Q., et al. Large language model agent: A survey on methodology, applications and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21460 , 2025b. Mattar, M. G. and Lengyel, M. Planning in the brain. Neu-ron , 110(6):914–934, 2022. McCarthy, J., Minsky, M. L., Rochester, N., and Shannon, C. E. A Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence, 1955. URL http: //jmc.stanford.edu/articles/dartmout h/dartmouth.pdf .Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., and Pribram, K. H. Plans and the structure of behavior . Henry Holt and Co, 1960. Minsky, M. Society of mind . Simon and Schuster, 1986. Moore, E. F. The Shortest Path Through a Maze. In Proc. of the International Symposium on the Theory of Switching ,pp. 285–292. Harvard University Press, 1959. Newell, A. Unified theories of cognition . Harvard University Press, 1994. Newell, A. and Simon, H. The Logic Theory Machine – A Complex Information Processing System. IRE Transac-tions on Information Theory , 2(3):61–79, 1956. Newell, A. and Simon, H. A. Human problem solving .Prentice-Hall, 1972. Newell, A., Shaw, J. C., and Simon, H. A. Elements of a theory of human problem solving. Psychological Review ,65(3):151, 1958. Noveck, I. Experimental pragmatics: The making of a cognitive science . Cambridge University Press, 2018. OpenAI. Openai o1 system card, 2024. URL https: //openai.com/index/openai-o1-system-c ard-safety/ .OpenAI. Introducing deep research, February 2025. URL 

https://openai.com/index/introducing -deep-research/ . Updated July 17, 2025. Osband, I. and Van Roy, B. Posterior Sampling for Rein-forcement Learning Without Episodes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.02731 , 2016. Osband, I. and Van Roy, B. Why is Posterior Sampling Better than Optimism for Reinforcement Learning? In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 2701– 2710, 2017. Osband, I., Russo, D., and Van Roy, B. (More) Efficient Reinforcement Learning via Posterior Sampling. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 26: 3003–3011, 2013. Packer, C., Wooders, S., Lin, K., Fang, V., Patil, S. G., Stoica, I., and Gonzalez, J. E. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 ,2023. Park, J. S., O’Brien, J., Cai, C. J., Morris, M. R., Liang, P., and Bernstein, M. S. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , pp. 1–22, 2023. Patil, S. G., Zhang, T., Wang, X., and Gonzalez, J. E. Go-rilla: Large language model connected with massive apis. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 126544–126565, 2024. Pearl, J. Heuristics: Intelligent Search Strategies for Com-puter Problem Solving. The Addison-Wesley Series in Artificial Intelligence , 1985. Perner, J. and Wimmer, H. “john thinks that mary thinks that. . . ” attribution of second-order beliefs by 5-to 10-year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child Psy-chology , 39(3):437–471, 1985. Piantadosi, S. T. Learning and the Language of Thought .Doctoral dissertation, MIT, 2011. Pohl, I. Heuristic Search Viewed as Path Finding in a Graph. 

Artificial Intelligence , 1(3-4):193–204, 1970. Posner, M. I. Foundations of cognitive science . MIT press Cambridge, MA, 1989. Prasad, A., Koller, A., Hartmann, M., Clark, P., Sabharwal, A., Bansal, M., and Khot, T. Adapt: As-needed decompo-sition and planning with language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 , pp. 4226–4252, 2024. Pugh, J. K., Soros, L. B., and Stanley, K. O. Quality di-versity: A new frontier for evolutionary computation. 

Frontiers in Robotics and AI , 3:40, 2016. Puterman, M. L. Markov Decision Processes—Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming . John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1994. 14 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Qi, Z., Liu, X., Iong, I. L., Lai, H., Sun, X., Zhao, W., Yang, Y., Yang, X., Sun, J., Yao, S., et al. WebRL: Training LLM web agents via self-evolving online curriculum re-inforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02337 ,2024. Qiu, L., Zhang, C. E., Tenenbaum, J. B., Kim, Y., and Levy, R. P. On the same wavelength? evaluating pragmatic reasoning in language models across broad concepts. In Christodoulopoulos, C., Chakraborty, T., Rose, C., and Peng, V. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 19924–19946, Suzhou, China, November 2025. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-332-6. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.1008. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-m ain.1008/ .Quilty-Dunn, J., Porot, N., and Mandelbaum, E. The best game in town: The reemergence of the language-of-thought hypothesis across the cognitive sciences. Be-havioral and Brain Sciences , 46:e261, 2023. Raptis, E. K., Kapoutsis, A. C., and Kosmatopoulos, E. B. Agentic LLM-based robotic systems for real-world appli-cations: a review on their agenticness and ethics. Fron-tiers in Robotics and AI , 12:1605405, 2025. Rocco, K. Fin 2: The first ai agent that delivers human-quality service, 2024. URL https://www.interc om.com/blog/announcing-fin-2-ai-agent -customer-service/ . Accessed: 2025-06-24. Rubin, S. M. and Reddy, R. The Locus Model of Search and its Use in Image Interpretation. In Proceedings of the 5th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,pp. 590–595, 1977. Rule, J. S. The child as hacker: Building more human-like models of learning . Doctoral dissertation, MIT, 2020. Rule, J. S., Piantadosi, S. T., Cropper, A., Ellis, K., Nye, M., and Tenenbaum, J. B. Symbolic metaprogram search improves learning efficiency and explains rule learning in humans. Nature Communications , 15(1):6847, 2024. Russell, S. J. and Norvig, P. Artificial Intelligence: A Mod-ern Approach . Pearson, 4th edition, 2020. Russo, D. and Van Roy, B. An Information-Theoretic Anal-ysis of Thompson Sampling. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 17(1):2442–2471, 2016. Russo, D. and Van Roy, B. Learning to Optimize via Information-Directed Sampling. Operations Research ,66(1):230–252, 2018. Russo, D. J., Van Roy, B., Kazerouni, A., Osband, I., and Wen, Z. A Tutorial on Thompson Sampling. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 11(1):1–96, 2018. Sahoo, P., Singh, A. K., Saha, S., Jain, V., Mondal, S., and Chadha, A. A systematic survey of prompt engineering in large language models: Techniques and applications. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07927 , 2024. Sakana AI. The AI Scientist: Towards Fully Automated Open-Ended Scientific Discovery, August 2024. URL 

https://sakana.ai/ai-scientist/ .Santoro, A., Lampinen, A., Mathewson, K., Lillicrap, T., and Raposo, D. Symbolic behaviour in artificial intelli-gence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03406 , 2021. Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., and Buckner, R. L. Remember-ing the past to imagine the future: The prospective brain. 

Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 8(9):657–661, 2007. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dess `ı, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli, M., Hambro, E., Zettlemoyer, L., Cancedda, N., and Scialom, T. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:68539–68551, 2023. Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Simonyan, K., Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., Lockhart, E., Hassabis, D., Graepel, T., et al. Mastering Atari, Go, Chess and Shogi by Planning with a Learned Model. Nature , 588 (7839):604–609, 2020. Seshadri, P., Cahyawijaya, S., Odumakinde, A., Singh, S., and Goldfarb-Tarrant, S. Lost in simulation: Llm-simulated users are unreliable proxies for human users in agentic evaluations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.17087 ,2026. Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. 

The Bell System Techical Journal , 27(3):379–423, 1948. Shen, Y., Song, K., Tan, X., Li, D., Lu, W., and Zhuang, Y. Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:38154–38180, 2023. Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., and Yao, S. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Rein-forcement Learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Sierra. Sierra — Better customer experiences — Sierra, 2026. URL https://sierra.ai/ .Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J., Guez, A., Sifre, L., Van Den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., et al. Mastering the 15 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Game of Go with Deep Neural Networks and Tree Search. 

Nature , 529(7587):484–489, 2016. Simon, H. A. A behavioral model of rational choice. The quarterly journal of economics , pp. 99–118, 1955. Smith, D. R. The design of divide and conquer algorithms. 

Science of Computer Programming , 5:37–58, 1985. Stalnaker, R. C. Assertion. Pragmatics , pp. 315–332, 1978. Strens, M. J. A Bayesian Framework for Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 943–950, 2000. Su, Y., Yang, D., Yao, S., and Yu, T. Language agents: Foundations, prospects, and risks. In Li, J. and Liu, F. (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing: Tutorial Abstracts , pp. 17–24, 2024. Sumers, T., Yao, S., Narasimhan, K., and Griffiths, T. Cog-nitive architectures for language agents. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. Sun, H., Wu, Y., Cheng, Y., and Chu, X. Game theory meets large language models: A systematic survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09053 , 2025. Szpunar, K. K. Episodic future thought: An emerging concept. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 5(2): 142–162, 2010. Tang, S. and Wiens, J. Model selection for offline reinforce-ment learning: Practical considerations for healthcare settings. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Confer-ence , pp. 2–35, 2021. Tarjan, R. Depth-First Search and Linear Graph Algorithms. 

SIAM Journal on Computing , 1(2):146–160, 1972. Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., and Goodman, N. D. How to grow a mind: Statistics, structure, and abstraction. Science , 331(6022):1279–1285, 2011. Thomas, P. S. Policy Gradient Coagent Networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 24, 2011. Thompson, W. R. On the Likelihood That One Unknown Probability Exceeds Another in View of the Evidence of Two Samples. Biometrika , 25(3/4):285–294, 1933. Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Biases in judgments reveal some heuristics of thinking under uncertainty. science , 185 (4157):1124–1131, 1974. Ullman, T. D., Spelke, E., Battaglia, P., and Tenenbaum, J. B. Mind games: Game engines as an architecture for intuitive physics. Trends in cognitive sciences , 21(9): 649–665, 2017. Van Opheusden, B., Kuperwajs, I., Galbiati, G., Bnaya, Z., Li, Y., and Ma, W. J. Expertise increases planning depth in human gameplay. Nature , 618(7967):1000–1005, 2023. Van Someren, M. W., Barnard, Y. F., Sandberg, J. A., et al. The think aloud method: a practical approach to mod-elling cognitive processes. London: AcademicPress , 11 (6), 1994. Vezhnevets, A. S., Agapiou, J. P., Aharon, A., Ziv, R., Matyas, J., Du ´e ˜nez-Guzm ´an, E. A., Cunningham, W. A., Osindero, S., Karmon, D., and Leibo, J. Z. Generative Agent-Based Modeling with Actions Grounded in Phys-ical, Social, or Digital Space using Concordia. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03664 , 2023. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J., Chen, Z., Tang, J., Chen, X., Lin, Y., et al. A Survey on Large Language Model Based Autonomous Agents. 

Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345, 2024a. Wang, Q., Wu, J., Jiang, Z., Tang, Z., Luo, B., Chen, N., Chen, W., and He, B. LLM-based Human Sim-ulations Have Not Yet Been Reliable. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.08579 , 2025a. Wang, X., Chen, Y., Yuan, L., Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Peng, H., and Ji, H. Executable code actions elicit better LLM agents. In Forty-first International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , 2024b. Wang, X., Li, B., Song, Y., Xu, F. F., Tang, X., Zhuge, M., Pan, J., Song, Y., Li, B., Singh, J., et al. Openhands: An open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741 , 2024c. Wang, X., Wang, Z., Liu, J., Chen, Y., Yuan, L., Peng, H., and Ji, H. MINT: Evaluating LLMs in Multi-turn Interac-tion with Tools and Language Feedback. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024d. Wang, Z., Cheng, Z., Zhu, H., Fried, D., and Neubig, G. What Are Tools Anyway? A Survey from the Language Model Perspective. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024e. Wang, Z., Xie, E., Li, A., Wang, Z., Liu, X., and Li, Z. Divide and conquer: Language models can plan and self-correct for compositional text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15688 , 2024f. 16 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Wang, Z. Z., Mao, J., Fried, D., and Neubig, G. Agent work-flow memory. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025b. Watkins, C. J. and Dayan, P. Q-Learning. Machine Learn-ing , 8(3):279–292, 1992. Webb, T., Mondal, S. S., and Momennejad, I. A brain-inspired agentic architecture to improve planning with llms. Nature Communications , 16(1):8633, 2025. Weber, T., Heess, N., Buesing, L., and Silver, D. Credit As-signment Techniques in Stochastic Computation Graphs. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence and Statistics , pp. 2650–2660, 2019. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 24824–24837, 2022. Wolpert, D. H. and Macready, W. G. No Free Lunch The-orems for Search. Technical Report SFI-TR-95-02-010, Santa Fe Institute, 1995. Wolpert, D. H. and Macready, W. G. No Free Lunch Theo-rems for Optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolution-ary Computation , 1:67–82, 1997. Wong, L., Grand, G., Lew, A. K., Goodman, N. D., Mans-inghka, V. K., Andreas, J., and Tenenbaum, J. B. From word models to world models: Translating from natural language to the probabilistic language of thought. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12672 , 2023. Wong, L., Collins, K. M., Ying, L., Zhang, C. E., Weller, A., Gerstenberg, T., O’Donnell, T., Lew, A. K., Andreas, J. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., et al. Modeling open-world cognition as on-demand synthesis of probabilistic models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12547 , 2025. Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Jiang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Liu, J., et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. Wu, S. Introducing Devin, the first AI software engineer, 2024. URL https://cognition.ai/blog/in troducing-devin . Accessed: 2025-06-24. Wu, S., Galley, M., Peng, B., Cheng, H., Li, G., Dou, Y., Cai, W., Zou, J., Leskovec, J., and Gao, J. CollabLLM: From passive responders to active collaborators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00640 , 2025. Wurgaft, D., Prystawski, B., Gandhi, K., and Goodman, N. D. Scaling up the think-aloud method. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , 2025. Xi, Z., Chen, W., Guo, X., He, W., Ding, Y., Hong, B., Zhang, M., Wang, J., Jin, S., Zhou, E., et al. The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. 

Science China Information Sciences , 68(2):121101, 2025. Xie, H., Xiong, H., and Wilson, R. Evaluating Predictive Performance and Learning Efficiency of Large Language Models with Think Aloud in Risky Decision Making. 

Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (CCN) , 2024. Xie, Y., Kawaguchi, K., Zhao, Y., Zhao, J. X., Kan, M.-Y., He, J., and Xie, M. Self-Evaluation Guided Beam Search for Reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:41618–41650, 2023. Xu, B., Peng, Z., Lei, B., Mukherjee, S., Liu, Y., and Xu, D. Rewoo: Decoupling reasoning from observations for efficient augmented language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18323 , 2023. Yang, J., Jimenez, C. E., Wettig, A., Lieret, K., Yao, S., Narasimhan, K., and Press, O. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineer-ing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:50528–50652, 2024a. Yang, R., Ding, R., Lin, Y., Zhang, H., and Zhang, T. Regu-larizing hidden states enables learning generalizable re-ward model for LLMs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:62279–62309, 2024b. Yang, Y. and Piantadosi, S. T. One model for the learning of language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119(5):e2021865119, 2022. Yao, S., Chen, H., Yang, J., and Narasimhan, K. Web-shop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded language agents. Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 35:20744–20757, 2022. Yao, S., Yu, D., Zhao, J., Shafran, I., Griffiths, T., Cao, Y., and Narasimhan, K. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with Large Language Models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:11809– 11822, 2023a. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K. R., and Cao, Y. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. In The Eleventh Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2023b. Yao, S., Shinn, N., Razavi, P., and Narasimhan, K. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12045 , 2024. 17 Cognitive Models and AI Algorithms Provide Templates for Designing Language Agents 

Ying, L., Truong, R., Collins, K. M., Zhang, C. E., Wei, M., Brooke-Wilson, T., Zhi-Xuan, T., Wong, L., and Tenenbaum, J. B. Language-informed synthesis of ratio-nal agent models for grounded theory-of-mind reasoning on-the-fly. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16755 , 2025. Yu, X. and Gen, M. Introduction to evolutionary algorithms .Springer, 2010. Zaharia, M., Khattab, O., Chen, L., Davis, J. Q., Miller, H., Potts, C., Zou, J., Carbin, M., Frankle, J., Rao, N., and Ghodsi, A. The shift from models to compound ai systems. https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog /2024/02/18/compound-ai-systems/ , 2024. Zamfirescu-Pereira, J. D., Wong, R. Y., Hartmann, B., and Yang, Q. Why Johnny can’t prompt: How non-AI experts try (and fail) to design LLM prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pp. 1–21, 2023. Zaslavsky, N., Kemp, C., Regier, T., and Tishby, N. Ef-ficient compression in color naming and its evolution. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115 (31):7937–7942, 2018. Zelikman, E., Huang, Q., Poesia, G., Goodman, N., and Haber, N. Parsel: Algorithmic reasoning with language models by composing decompositions. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 36:31466–31523, 2023. Zhai, S., Bai, H., Lin, Z., Pan, J., Tong, P., Zhou, Y., Suhr, A., Xie, S., LeCun, Y., Ma, Y., et al. Fine-tuning large vision-language models as decision-making agents via reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 37:110935–110971, 2024. Zhang, C. E., Wong, L., Grand, G., and Tenenbaum, J. B. Grounded physical language understanding with proba-bilistic programs and simulated worlds. In Proceedings of the annual meeting of the cognitive science society ,volume 45, 2023. Zhang, C. E., Colas, C., Poesia, G., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Andreas, J. Code-enabled language models can outper-form reasoning models on diverse tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20909 , 2025a. Zhang, D., Zhoubian, S., Hu, Z., Yue, Y., Dong, Y., and Tang, J. ReST-MCTS*: LLM Self-Training via Process Reward Guided Tree Search. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 37:64735–64772, 2024a. Zhang, J., Xiang, J., Yu, Z., Teng, F., Chen, X., Chen, J., Zhuge, M., Cheng, X., Hong, S., Wang, J., et al. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10762 , 2024b. Zhang, Q., Hu, C., Upasani, S., Ma, B., Hong, F., Kamanuru, V., Rainton, J., Wu, C., Ji, M., Li, H., et al. Agentic Con-text Engineering: Evolving Contexts for Self-Improving Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04618 ,2025b. Zhang, Y., Mao, S., Ge, T., Wang, X., Xia, Y., Lan, M., and Wei, F. K-level reasoning: Establishing higher order be-liefs in large language models for strategic reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 7212–7234, 2025c. Zhang, Z., Dai, Q., Bo, X., Ma, C., Li, R., Chen, X., Zhu, J., Dong, Z., and Wen, J.-R. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model-based agents. ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 43(6):1–47, 2025d. Zhou, A., Yan, K., Shlapentokh-Rothman, M., Wang, H., and Wang, Y.-X. Language Agent Tree Search Unifies Reasoning, Acting, and Planning in Language Models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 62138–62160, 2024. Zhou, D., Sch ¨arli, N., Hou, L., Wei, J., Scales, N., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Cui, C., Bousquet, O., Le, Q., et al. Least-to-most prompting enables complex reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625 ,2022. Zhuge, M., Wang, W., Kirsch, L., Faccio, F., Khizbullin, D., and Schmidhuber, J. Gptswarm: Language agents as op-timizable graphs. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Zoph, B. and Le, Q. Neural Architecture Search with Re-inforcement Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. 18