Title: Tell Me What To Learn: Generalizing Neural Memory to be Controllable in Natural Language

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.23201v2

Published Time: Wed, 04 Mar 2026 02:31:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 58

Markdown Content:
## Tell Me What To Learn: Generalizing Neural Memory to be Controllable in Natural Language 

Max S. Bennett max.bennett@columbia.edu 

Columbia University 

Thomas Zollo tpz2105@columbia.edu 

Columbia University 

Richard Zemel zemel@cs.columbia.edu 

Columbia University 

Abstract 

Modern machine learning models are deployed in diverse, non-stationary environments where they must continually adapt to new tasks and evolving knowledge. Continual fine-tuning and in-context learning are costly and brittle, whereas neural memory methods promise lightweight updates with minimal forgetting. However, existing neural memory models typically assume a single fixed objective and homogeneous information streams, leaving users with no control over what the model remembers or ignores over time. To address this challenge, we propose a generalized neural memory system that performs flex-ible updates based on learning instructions specified in natural language. Our approach enables adaptive agents to learn selectively from heterogeneous information sources, sup-porting settings—such as healthcare and customer service—where fixed-objective memory updates are insufficient. Our code and model are open-sourced at https://github.com/ maxbennett/Generalized-Neural-Memory .

1. Introduction 

Modern foundation models, including large language models (LLMs), acquire broad skills and world knowledge during large-scale pretraining (Brown et al., 2020). However, real-world deployment exposes them to diverse, non-stationary environments that demand con-tinual adaptation to new tasks and evolving knowledge (Lazaridou et al., 2021). While fine-tuning and other gradient-based post-training techniques are effective for adaptation, they are costly, require data or environments to be available before deployment, and often fail when applied repeatedly due to catastrophic forgetting (de Masson d’Autume et al., 2019). Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2021) and in-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020), by contrast, enable more seamless on-the-fly adaptation to new distributions and instances. Still, per-instance retrieval can be cumbersome and imprecise, and ICL suffers from both the quadratic cost of Transformer attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) 

1

> arXiv:2602.23201v2 [cs.LG] 3 Mar 2026 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 1: An AI system with memory can adapt to its environment continuously by in-tegrating diverse information sources. We propose a generalized neural memory system that performs flexible long-term updates based on learning instructions specified in natural language. Our approach enables important use cases in critical domains such as healthcare, where an adaptive agent must learn from heterogeneous documents that preclude using a neural memory system with a fixed objective. and significant performance degradation as more new information is integrated (Liu et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023). Neural memory has emerged as a possible solution to these challenges and presents a promising middle ground (Behrouz et al., 2024; Bulatov et al., 2022; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015). Broadly, neural memory approaches equip a model with an external, often differ-entiable memory that can be updated over time and accessed at inference, allowing the model to accumulate information across interactions without retraining. New information is encoded into, e.g., compact vector slots or dedicated memory tokens, and the system learns how to write to and read from this memory to modulate the model’s predictions. Neural memory mitigates the catastrophic forgetting and performance challenges of fine-tuning, because at test time the model parameters are not modified and responses change only via the memory interface. Further, it avoids the token-consumption challenges of ICL by compressing knowledge and skills into a fixed-size memory, as well as the system over-head associated with retrieval. This general approach has recently shown state-of-the-art performance on various long-context benchmarks, including language modeling, needle-in-the-haystack retrieval, time series forecasting, and DNA modeling (Behrouz et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024c). Though a promising first step, neural memory systems are typically designed under a sin-gle notion of “what to learn,” implicitly assuming that all future experience will come from homogeneous data sources and conform to a fixed learning objective. In many real-world set-tings, however, different documents expose different aspects the system should internalize— facts, style, tone, escalation heuristics, safety constraints, or other user preferences—and these aspects can conflict across sources and the same sources can have different learning goals depending on the downstream application. Downstream users often know precisely which parts of which inputs should be remembered or ignored, but current neural memory systems provide no direct mechanism for expressing that intent. 

> 2M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Consider a medical practice deploying an AI agent for post-operative support: doctors may want the agent to learn from years of nurse–patient transcripts when to escalate to a human versus answer autonomously, while explicitly avoiding the outdated factual protocols mentioned in those calls. At the same time, they want the AI agent to absorb accurate, up-to-date procedural and billing facts from regularly updated internal protocol documents, without adopting their overly technical tone. Alternatively consider the case of a customer service AI agent: a company will want to adapt their AI agent to follow many of the behaviors found in historical chat transcripts between customers and human customer service professionals. However, many of the return, shipping, and billing policies mentioned in those transcripts will be out-of-date. The tran-scripts also contain sensitive personal information. The company will want to train their AI agent on those transcripts while ignoring out-of-date policies and personal information. And at the same time, the company will want the AI agent to learn up-to-date return, shipping, and billing policies from regularly updated internal documents. To address the challenge of aligning memory updates with user intent, we introduce a 

generalized neural memory (GNM) that lets downstream users guide updates with natural-language instructions, telling the model what to learn from new data (Figure 1). Our instruction-conditioned memory turns a document/instruction pair into a targeted, long-term update, yielding a controllable, efficient alternative to ICL and RAG while avoid-ing the destructive interference and computational cost of additional training. This frame-work supports lightweight, selective learning of information over time under explicit human guidance. Our goal is to move the field toward AI agents that continuously adapt as col-laborative, lifelong learning partners, suitable for deployment in safety-critical, evolving domains. To summarize our contributions: • We introduce language-controlled neural memory, enabling users to specify what to learn or ignore via natural-language learning instructions. • We study GNM empirically, finding strong generalization to unseen instructions, out-performing strong baselines on selectivity, efficiency, and compositional generaliza-tion. 

2. Related Work 

Continual learning studies how models can incrementally acquire knowledge from non-stationary data streams while retaining previously learned capabilities and addressing both the stability–plasticity dilemma and catastrophic forgetting (Hadsell et al., 2020; McClel-land et al., 1995; McCloskey and Cohen, 1989). A broad range of strategies have been pro-posed to accomplish this. Regularization-based methods constrain parameter updates using importance estimates or Bayesian approximations to preserve prior knowledge (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Ritter et al., 2018; Zenke et al., 2017). Replay-based approaches approximate past data distributions by storing or generating representative examples (Buzzega et al., 

> 3M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

2020; Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2022; Shin et al., 2017). Architectural methods isolate or ex-pand task-specific parameters to reduce interference (Fernando et al., 2017; Rusu et al., 2016; Yoon et al., 2018), while optimization-based and meta-learning approaches further modify update dynamics to balance transfer and interference over time (Farajtabar et al., 2020; Javed and White, 2019). Despite their success in controlled benchmarks, many of these methods rely on explicit task boundaries, replay buffers, or repeated retraining, assump-tions that break down in realistic settings with weak supervision, blurred task boundaries, and limited compute or storage budgets (Bang et al., 2022; de Masson d’Autume et al., 2019; Lazaridou et al., 2021; Ren et al., 2021; van de Ven and Tolias, 2019; Wang et al., 2024a). Related to continual learning is the literature on knowledge editing for large language models, which studies how to modify specific factual associations in pretrained models with-out full retraining (Cao et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2023). These methods perform targeted, post-hoc updates to model parameters to change one fact or a small set of related facts while preserving the remainder of the model, and have been analyzed and benchmarked across a range of settings (Gupta et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024). These approaches focus on precise, post-hoc modifications of parametric knowledge—typically tar-geting one fact or a small set of related facts per edit; in contrast, our setting addresses a broader and more dynamic problem of selectively learning from streams of heterogeneous documents under natural-language instructions. Neural memory offers an alternative substrate for continual adaptation by decoupling learning from parameter updates, enabling information to be written, stored, and retrieved without overwriting core model weights (Graves et al., 2014; Miller et al., 2016; Weston et al., 2014). Recent work integrates neural memory into Transformers and large language models to extend effective context and support long-horizon behavior, either via persistent memory tokens or explicit read/write mechanisms that can be updated online (Behrouz et al., 2024; Bulatov et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024c). Related retrieval-based approaches emphasize non-parametric adaptation, including kNN-style language models and scalable key–value datastores that trade learning for lookup efficiency (He et al., 2024; Khandelwal et al., 2020). While effective for factual recall, these methods depend heavily on retrieval quality and do not support selective or structured memory updates. More broadly, existing neural memory systems optimize a fixed update objective—typically next-token likelihood— implicitly assuming homogeneous information streams and providing no mechanism for users to specify what information should be learned, ignored, or suppressed. Our work addresses this gap by framing memory updates as an instruction-conditioned process, enabling explicit, language-level control over what a model learns from each incoming document. 

3. Generalizing Neural Memory to be Controllable with Language 

Our goal is to enable downstream users to control neural memory updates via natural lan-guage. To do so, we model memory management as an explicitly instruction-conditioned 

process: each arriving document is paired with a natural language instruction specifying what information to learn or ignore. The system then integrates the instruction, docu-

> 4M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

ment, and current memory state to produce an updated memory that modifies subsequent predictions. We now formalize this setting and objective. 

3.1. Problem Setup 

We consider a setting in which a model equipped with neural memory interacts with a stream of documents, each with a learning instruction, and user queries. Memory is updated only when a new document–instruction pair arrives; user queries are answered using the current memory state. Formally, we assume access to a pretrained model fθ with parameters θ, augmented with a neural memory state Mt ∈ M after t updates. We write pθ(y | · , M t) for the conditional distribution over responses induced by fθ when conditioned on memory state 

Mt. The memory Mt can be implemented in numerous ways, including via continuous prefix embeddings, a bank of memory vectors, or layer-wise memory tokens maintained by a long-term memory module; our formulation is agnostic to this choice as long as Mt can be updated and used to condition fθ.Documents arrive as a sequence S = {(It, D t)}Tt=1 ∈ S , where Dt is a document con-taining candidate information and It is a natural language learning instruction specifying what aspects of Dt should be learned or ignored. In our medical example, Dt might be the transcript of a nurse–patient call, and It might read “learn when the nurse escalates to a doctor, but do not learn any medication dosing from this document.” Between document updates t and t + 1 , user queries q are answered with pθ(y | q, M t), where Mt modulates the model’s predictions. For a clinical agent, such queries might include patient questions such as “Is this symptom normal after surgery?” or clinician queries such as “When should I escalate a post-op fever?” 

3.2. Language-Controlled Memory Updates 

We formalize language-controlled memory as a parameterized update rule 

Uψ : M × I × D → M 

with parameters ψ. Uψ takes as input the current memory Mt−1, an instruction It, and a document Dt, and produces an updated memory 

Mt = Uψ(Mt−1, I t, D t).

Here I is the space of natural language learning instructions and D is the space of documents. The instruction It modulates how information in Dt is compressed into Mt. Existing fixed neural memory systems (e.g., Behrouz et al. (2024); Wang et al. (2024c)) fit naturally into this framework as special cases in which the instruction is fixed, It = I⋆ for all t. In these models, the update rule Uψ implicitly optimizes a single, static notion of “what to learn” (e.g., whatever improves the language modeling objective on Dt), whereas our setting explicitly exposes It as a controllable input that can vary across documents, domains, and/or users. 

> 5M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

3.3. Generalized Neural Memory Objective 

Having described our problem setting and language-controlled memory update rule, we now formalize our learning objective. Given a sequence S of document–instruction pairs, an initial memory M0, and an update rule Uψ, we obtain a trajectory of memory states 

Mt = Uψ(Mt−1, I t, D t), t = 1 , . . . , T. 

At each step, we evaluate the model on probes (q, y ) ∈ Q t (where q is a user query and y is a correct response) drawn from the current and past timesteps using the updated memory 

Mt:

Lseq (ψ; S) = 

> T

∑

> t=1

∑

> (q,y )∈Q t

ℓ(y, p θ(· | q, M t)); (1) a typical choice of ℓ might be a masked cross-entropy loss over the target tokens of y. Probes may include: (1) positive queries that should be answerable if the model has correctly learned the aspects of Dt requested by It (e.g., “For a laparoscopic cholecystectomy, when should a fever trigger escalation to a surgeon?”); (2) negative (or control) queries that should remain unchanged if the model has successfully ignored or forgotten disallowed aspects (e.g., private information or outdated dosing instructions that should no longer be recommended to patients). The language-controlled memory learning problem is to find parameters ψ

that minimize the expected sequence loss min  

> ψ

ES∼S 

[Lseq (ψ; S)], (2) subject to the recurrence Mt = Uψ(Mt−1, I t, D t) for t = 1 , . . . , T .In practice, this framework can be instantiated in various ways—for example, by un-rolling sequences of length T , applying the update rule Uψ at each document, and optimizing 

ψ with gradient-based methods, with or without updating the underlying language model parameters θ. The specific architectural choices are orthogonal to the formulation. In the experiments we present, both the base model and memory are adapted during training, but only the memory is updated at test time. 

4. Experimental Setup 

We next evaluate the empirical viability of the generalized neural memory framework. Specifically, we focus on three questions: (i) Can a neural memory system learn to se-lectively store, ignore, or update information when given natural-language learning instruc-tions? (ii) Does this behavior generalize to instructions not seen during training? and (iii) Does training a GNM in this way yield performance gains over existing approaches to this problem? Our code and model are open-sourced at https://github.com/maxbennett/ Generalized-Neural-Memory .

> 6M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 2: Examples from our benchmark, including a document and a sample of three possible learning instructions, each with a sample of possible queries and correct responses. 

4.1. Benchmark Construction 

Answering these questions requires a benchmark with five properties: (1) it presents a sequence of document–instruction pairs; (2) after each timestep, it supports evaluating whether the model learned exactly what it was instructed to learn and ignored what it was instructed to ignore; (3) it covers multiple kinds of learning, including knowledge, style, and behavior; (4) it enables testing generalization to instruction types not seen during training; and (5) it avoids spurious shortcuts, so the task cannot be solved from the document alone and instead requires attending to both the instruction and the document. We are not aware of any existing real-world benchmarks that satisfy these requirements, which is natural given the novelty of the setting: to our knowledge, this is the first work to explicitly pose and study language-controlled memory updates as a core capability to be evaluated. As a result, we construct a synthetic benchmark that instantiates the five properties above, enabling controlled experiments and analysis. We view the development of comparable benchmarks on real-world data as an important direction for future work. Our benchmark builds on the well established CounterFACT dataset, originally designed for testing fact editing in LLMs (Meng et al., 2023). It consists of 21,918 factual statements paired with deliberately false target answers, paraphrases, and neighborhood facts. Because target answers are known to be false, correct responses after updates reliably indicate new learning rather than pretraining knowledge. Neighborhood facts share the original true answer to the target fact, but of an unrelated subject (e.g., if the target fact is “Angola is in Antarctica”, a neighborhood fact might be “Kenya is in Africa”). These neighborhood facts are critical for evaluating the “specificity” of fact edits (e.g., changing Angola’s location from Africa to Antarctica, but not changing other countries from Africa to Antarctica). We use GPT 5.1 to categorize each fact into one of 16 semantic categories. We withhold all facts from four categories from training so we can test generalization to novel learning instructions. Documents are procedurally generated by sampling 3-8 facts from distinct categories and rendering them as short bullet-point documents. We split our dataset into three buckets: train , val-id (“in-distribution validation data”), and test-ood (“out-of-distribution test data”). Both val-id and test-ood contain facts not in training documents; 

> 7M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

but val-id contains categories that are in training documents, while test-ood contains categories that are not in training documents. Our resulting synthetic dataset consists of 11,849 documents in train , 351 documents in val-id , and 2,276 documents in test-ood .For some experiments, documents can optionally be given one of 60 different markup styles (see Table 8 for examples). Full dataset construction details are provided in Appendix A.1. 

4.2. Evaluation Protocol 

Evaluation follows an episodic protocol. Each test episode consists of a sequence of document– instruction pairs, interleaved with query probes. At each step, a document is passed along with an instruction for what is to be learned from that document. The model is then asked to generate responses to several queries which probe whether or not it correctly learned what it was instructed to learn and ignored what it was instructed to ignore from the input document. During each episode, we also probe performance on queries from previous time steps to evaluate retention across all measures (i.e., whether facts learned several time steps ago are still retained). We explore 4 different types of instructions across different experiments: 1. Fact instruction: Model is instructed to only learn facts from a particular category (e.g. “memorize any facts about countries, but ignore all the other facts”). 2. Format instruction: Model is instructed to adopt only the markdown formatting in the document, ignoring facts (e.g. “adopt the markdown format of the document, but do not learn any of the facts from the document”). 3. Refusal instruction: Model is instructed to learn all facts in document except those related to a specific category for which the model should instead answer with a refusal (e.g. “learn everything in the document, except any facts about countries, if the user asks anything about such a fact, refuse to answer it and reply ‘sorry’”). 4. Compositional instruction: Model is instructed to learn both a specific category of facts and to refuse any facts from a different category, and to ignore everything else. These four instruction types provide a balanced test of language-controlled memory across knowledge, style, and behaviors. Further, setting up the benchmark in this way allows us to eliminate spurious correlations: learning instructions are randomly assigned to documents and any of the three types of information (formats, facts, and refusals) could be targeted within any given document. Figure 2 shows an example from our dataset of a document, possible learning instructions, and the corresponding updates that should occur. Now, we describe metrics corresponding to each type of learning instruction. When aggregating across measures for a total score, we use the harmonic mean, as in prior work using the CounterFact dataset (Meng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024c). • Fact Accuracy: For a fact that the model was instructed to learn, what percentage of the time does a model correctly provide the target answer? 

> 8M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

• Fact Specificity: For a fact that the model was instructed to learn, what percentage of the time does a model provide the correct answer for neighborhood facts, thereby demonstrating that the model did not incorrectly update neighborhood information? • Fact Selectivity: For the facts the model was instructed to ignore , what percentage of the time does the model correctly provide the original answer, thereby demonstrat-ing the model successfully ignored the fact in the document. • Format Accuracy: When the model is instructed to adopt the formatting in the document, what percentage of the time does the model correctly respond in the new format? • Refusal Precision: When the model responds to a query with a refusal, such as “sorry, I cannot provide that answer”, what percentage of the time is the model correct in doing so, based on the previous learning instructions and documents seen? • Refusal Recall: What percentage of the facts that the model is supposed to refuse to answer does the model successfully refuse? Throughout all experiments, we report on performance on our out-of-distribution test data (test-ood ), which contains categories of facts never seen during training with corresponding learning instructions that have never been seen during training. No information on these held out categories or these novel learning instructions is seen by the model during our fine-tuning. In other words, at test time, the model is forced to generalize to unseen learning instructions . This is to highlight the importance and efficacy of control using 

natural language , as it enables flexible control by downstream users that would not be possible via more trivial solutions, such as one-hot encoding a set of pretrained learning instructions. 

4.3. Our GNM Model 

To avoid the cost of pretraining a neural memory model from scratch, we initialize our GNM model from MemoryLLM (Wang et al., 2024c). MemoryLLM is a recent neural memory architecture built on Llama-3, where neural memory is instantiated as embeddings prepended to each layer of the transformer. Of all the neural memory architectures we are aware of, MemoryLLM is the most amenable to our setup, as it is both open source and directly separates the ‘learning’ step from the ‘query’ step. During the learning step, a document is provided, and the last 256 embeddings of each layer are saved into a neural memory bank consisting of 7,098 tokens for each layer. The 256 new memories randomly overwrite tokens within the existing bank. During inference, each layer may attend to both its context and the prepended memory embeddings. MemoryLLM is pretrained on a standard next-token prediction task, but with chunking of long documents to encourage the model to produce memory representations that are useful for future token prediction. To initialize our GNM model, we modify MemoryLLM’s learning step: instead of taking only a document as input, our GNM model takes in both a document and a learning instruction. 

> 9M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Training We train GNM by fine-tuning our “instructable” MemoryLLM on the training data from our benchmark. We roll out to episodes of length 4, and use gradient accumulation with an effective batch size of 6 episodes (24 documents). Training is terminated when loss on our val-id dataset is no longer decreasing. For each time step, we randomly select a document and learning instruction, pass it to our model’s learning step, and then compute masked cross entropy loss on several queries that probe how well the responses perform on our desiderata. At each time step, we always compute our loss not only on queries from the current time step, but also from all prior time steps to encourage the model to retain its behavior throughout an episode. We propagate gradients over one step at a time, including both the learning pass and the subsequent inference pass. See Appendix B.3 and C.4 for more details on our training protocols. 

4.4. Baselines 

The nature of our setting precludes directly fine-tuning an LLM on each input document at test time: by construction, a document may contain information that the model must explicitly ignore. Standard fine-tuning provides no mechanism for distinguishing which aspects of an input should or should not be learned, and would therefore entangle disal-lowed information into the model parameters. This necessitates developing novel versions of alternative approaches as baselines. Concretely, we evaluate three baselines: the original pretrained MemoryLLM , a fine-tuned in-context learning baseline ( ICL-FT ), and a fine-tuned retrieval-augmented gener-ation baseline ( RAG-FT ). For ICL-FT, the full history of document–instruction pairs observed so far in an episode is placed directly into the context window at inference time. When answering a query, the model has access to all prior documents and their associated learning instructions, and must generate the correct response by attending to the relevant information while ignoring disallowed content specified by the instructions. For RAG-FT, document–instruction pairs are instead stored in a vector database; at inference time, a subset of these pairs is retrieved based on their cosine similarity to the input query and included in the context, reducing computational cost but introducing sensitivity to retrieval quality. Both ICL-FT and RAG-FT are fine-tuned end-to-end on our learning-instruction-following task using Llama-3, the same backbone used by MemoryLLM and GNM. To ensure strong baselines, we used GPT-5.1 to author five candidate prompts for each method, evaluated all variants on our test-ood 

split, and fine-tuned the best-performing prompt. Among these, ICL-FT constitutes a particularly strong baseline. At inference time, all information required to answer each query correctly is explicitly available in-context, and the model is directly fine-tuned to follow learning instructions. As such, ICL-FT provides a high-capacity, high-compute point of comparison for evaluating the efficiency and selectivity of neural memory-based approaches. Note that we do not directly compare against parameter-based fact editing methods (e.g., ROME-style approaches), as such techniques are designed for isolated, post-hoc modification of one or a small number of factual associations in otherwise static models. Our setting 

> 10 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

instead involves continual, instruction-conditioned updates over heterogeneous documents that may contain multiple facts, formatting patterns, and behavioral constraints, including information that must explicitly be ignored. 

5. Results 

5.1. Continual Learning of Targeted Facts 

For our first experiment we test the simplest case of our benchmark, whereby each model is trained and tested only on continual learning of facts. We train GNM on episodes of length 4, where learning instructions target only one of the categories of facts present in each document, and compute masked cross-entropy loss on 4 queries across paraphrases of the targeted fact, neighborhood facts and facts to ignore from the current time step and all prior time steps. After training, we report performance only on learning instructions relating to the four categories that were held out from training, and test on episodes of length 10. In Figure 3, we show detailed performance on each prior query after each incoming document-instruction pair. These results demonstrate that GNM successfully adheres to natural language instructions about what to learn, and that this ability to follow natural language learning instructions generalized impressively well; all reported performance is on learning instructions never seen during training . GNM achieves close to the accuracy per-formance of ICL-FT (which pays the higher computational cost of putting all documents and instructions into context), while outperforming all baselines on the overall score. Inter-estingly, GNM achieves substantial performance gains on selectivity; GNM is much better at ignoring facts it was instructed to ignore. Even when fine-tuned directly on this task, RAG-FT and ICL-FT struggle to ignore information that is provided in-context; in con-trast, neural memory has an additional learning step whereby the model can selectively save information into memory, which enables neural memory systems to do better on these tasks (see Section 5.5 for evidence for this hypothesis). We summarize these differences with aggregate comparisons in Figure 4. 

5.2. Continual Learning of Knowledge, Styles, and Behaviors 

Having validated our approach in a simpler facts-only setting, we now move on to a more complex experimental setup. Our goal in this experiment is to evaluate whether the GNM framework can apply to diverse types of learning outside of only facts. In this setting, documents containing facts are augmented with a random markdown format, and are ac-companied by instructions to remember either (1) particular facts while ignoring formats, (2) format while ignoring facts, or (3) all facts except refusing to answer queries about any facts within a specific category. In each episode, all documents have special formatting, but the model is only instructed to change its format once per episode. As in our previous experiment, at test time all document-instruction pairs involve either previously unseen instructions or update types (i.e., unseen formats). 

> 11 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 3: Continual Learning of Targeted Facts (Heatmaps). Shows average per-formance on each desiderata across an episode. The x-axis ‘Documents Seen’ represents the sequence index that the memory state is in (e.g., x-axis value of i represents the mem-ory state after seeing the first i documents in an episode). The y-axis ‘Query Timestep’ represents the sequence element that a set of queries derives from (e.g., y-axis value of j

represents the queries that are sampled from the document-instruction pair that was the jth element in the episode sequence). The bottom diagonal is ignored because these represent queries for document-instruction pairs that have not yet been seen. 

> 12 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 4: Continual Learning of Targeted Facts (Overall Performance). The left chart (‘Total Performance’) shows the average performance across all time steps. ‘Score’ is the harmonic mean of these averages across accuracy, specificity, and selectivity. ‘Base’ is the performance of Llama-3 probed on only queries, without any document or learning instruction. We show base model performance for reference. The base model naturally does well on specificity and selectivity, as it represents the performance of the model without any interference from new facts. The right chart (‘Performance By Recency’) reports the ‘score’ of the queries associated with document learned x steps ago, where x can be 0, 4, or 9. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals (CI). 

Figure 5: Continual Learning of Knowledge, Styles, and Behaviors. Here we report results of our ‘Continual Learning of Knowledge, Styles, and Behaviors’ experiment. For the left three charts, we report results by recency to evaluate retention performance over the course of an episode. For the plot on the far right, we show the inference cost in FLOPs per token based on how many document-instruction pairs have been learned. Error bars show 95% CI. Full details are reported in Appendix C.6. Results can be seen in Figure 5. GNM performs better across our range of desiderata, particularly on format accuracy and fact selectivity (consistent with prior experiment). Note that format accuracy at test time requires generalizing to a format that was never seen during training. To sanity check these results on format accuracy, we compare performance of each model on formats seen in our training dataset with our test data (see Table 8 for format types). In Figure 6, we show that all models achieve perfect performance on formats used in training, but RAG-FT and ICL-FT fail to generalize to unseen formats, while GNM generalizes well. On computational efficiency, GNM outperforms other methods, not requiring heavy prompts with the entire document and learning instruction, and scaling O(1) with the number of documents seen. 

5.3. Compositional Generalization 

To further test the natural language generalization of GNM, we test the model trained in the prior experiment on compositional learning instructions. During training, all models 

> 13 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 6: Format Generalization. Format accuracy performance on formats seen during training (‘Train Formats’) vs. those used only in validation (‘Val-ID Formats’) vs those used only in our test-ood data (‘Test-OOD Formats’) in our ‘Continual Learning of Knowledge, Styles, and Behaviors’ experiment. Error bars show 95% CI. See Table 8 for details on format types. 

Figure 7: Compositional Generalization. Results of ‘Compositional Generalization’ experiment. See Section 5.3 and Appendix D for details. Error bars show 95% CI. were only trained on learning instructions that directed a single type of learning – either to adopt a specific fact, adopt the format, or adopt refusals of a specific fact. Here we evaluate how models perform when given a learning instruction that directs the model to learn both 

a specific category of fact and to refuse a different specific category of fact from the same document. Results can be seen in Figure 7. GNM performs twice as well as RAG-FT and over ten times as well as ICL-FT on fact selectivity while achieving parity performance on our other desirata. This further reinforces the ability of GNM to generalize to new learning instructions specified in natural language. 

5.4. Ablation Study 

To investigate why GNM outperforms on fact selectivity and format accuracy, we run an ablation experiment where we train a GNM model in the paradigm of experiment in Section 5.2, but only pass gradients over the inference step, not over the memorization step. This allows us to differentiate the gains seen from (a) learning what to remember versus (b) learning what to attend to in memory (as the ablated model is forced to rely on). As seen in Figure 8, this ablation degraded all the gains on fact selectivity and format accuracy seen in GNM, demonstrating that learning how to modify what to remember is critical for the selectivity and generalization performance gains in GNM. 

> 14 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 8: Ablation . Shows how performance degrades when training an ablated version of GNM (‘GNM (Ablation)’) that only passes gradients over the inference step, not over the learning step. Error bars show 95% CI. 

5.5. Analysis of Memory Updates 

To understand why GNM’s memory updates improve downstream performance, we analyze how memory updates encode target information versus distractors not meant to be mem-orized. In particular, we ask whether GNM’s advantage in selectivity arises from where 

and how information is written into memory, rather than from differences in inference-time attention alone. As a testbed to answer this quetion, we construct 200 synthetic documents, each contain-ing exactly two facts drawn from different semantic categories: one designated as the target 

to be learned and the other as a distractor that should be ignored. Each document is paired with a learning instruction that specifies which fact to learn. This controlled setup allows us to isolate how the memory update mechanism responds to explicit learning instructions in the presence of competing information. For each model and for each layer, we measure the alignment between the memory update produced at that layer and the hidden-state rep-resentations of the target versus distractor facts. Concretely, for a given layer we compute the mean embedding across all newly written memory tokens and take its dot product with the normalized direction vector from the distractor hidden state to the target hidden state. Positive alignment indicates that the memory update preferentially encodes information consistent with the target fact. Full methodological details are provided in Appendix E. The results, shown in Figure 9, reveal a striking difference between GNM and the ablated model. The ablated variant—trained without gradient flow through the memory update step—shows no meaningful alignment with either the target or distractor facts at any layer, consistent with its failure to follow learning instructions. In contrast, GNM exhibits a clear and sustained increase in target alignment beginning in the middle layers and strengthening through later layers. This suggests that GNM learns to selectively route instruction-relevant information into memory, rather than passively compressing the entire document. Importantly, we observe that target alignment emerges at specific intermediate layers of the network and strengthens through later layers. This emergence coincides with the point at which downstream selectivity becomes robust, suggesting a link between how information is encoded during the memory update and the model’s ability to ignore distractors at inference time. This pattern points to selective memory encoding as a potential driver of GNM’s 

> 15 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 9: Memory Analysis . ‘Target Alignment’ is computed as the dot product 

M · dtarget , where M is the mean memory update across all new memory tokens in a given layer, and dtarget = ( htarget − hdistractor )/ || htarget − hdistractor || is the normalized direction from distractor to target hidden states at each layer. Positive values indicate the memory update encodes more target information. Error bars show 95% CI. Left plot shows align-ment across all layers. Right plot shows averaged alignments on layers 15-30. See Appendix E for details. improved behavior, rather than improvements arising solely from inference-time attention or retrieval. To test this hypothesis directly, we perform a layer-wise causal intervention by selectively disrupting individual layers of GNM during the memory update step. For each layer l, we replace GNM’s layer with the corresponding ablation model layer and measure the resulting accuracy and selectivity on held-out examples. We report on the degradation in accuracy and selectivity performance across each of these swaps. As shown in Figure 10, we find that the early layers (5-14) are causally required for GNM’s improved selectivity performance, but not its accuracy performance. Further, it is 

after these layers that target alignment emerges (see Figure 9). We hypothesize that it is these early layers (5-14) where GNM learns to represent the learning instruction, and in layers 15-31 this representation is then used to align the neural memory towards the target fact and away from distractor fact. Thus it seems that disrupting these early layers disrupts the representation of the learning instruction. The results also support the claim that GNM learns to use learning instruction to selectively represent memories, and in so doing support downstream selectivity at inference time. Taken together, our findings support a two-stage interpretation of GNM’s memory updates: earlier layers encode the learning instruction it-self, while subsequent layers use that representation to selectively write instruction-relevant information into memory. As a result, downstream selectivity arises because irrelevant information is never strongly stored, not because it is merely filtered out at query time. 

> 16 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 10: Layer-Wise Ablation : for each layer l, we replace GNM’s layer with the corresponding ablation model layer and measure the resulting accuracy and selectivity on held-out examples. We report on the degradation in accuracy and selectivity performance across each of these swaps. y-axis is the drop in performance (0.25 means a drop of 25%, so selectivity might go from 75% to 50%, for example). x-axis is the layer being swapped. Results show clearly that GNM is doing something unique in layers 5-14 that causally improves selectivity, while not being particularly important for accuracy. 

6. Discussion & Limitations 

In this paper, we formulate the goal of language-controlled memory updates, and empirically demonstrate (a) that neural memory can be trained to use natural language instructions to guide memory updates, (b) that it can work across diverse types of learning, and (c) that it generalizes well to new learning instructions. We further demonstrate performance advan-tages of GNM over ICL and RAG in terms of computational efficiency, selectivity, and gen-eralization. We believe this offers promising progress towards AI agents that continuously adapt as collaborative, lifelong learning partners, suitable for deployment in safety-critical, evolving domains. We hope future work extends this research by gathering real-world benchmarks for the setting proposed herein, given that here we used a synthetic benchmark. Further, when learning at test time, MemoryLLM overwrites a small existing memory store, leading retention performance to exponentially degrade over ∼ 20 time steps. There are numerous ways to extend this, including increasing memory tokens and using retrieval techniques (Wang et al., 2025). Lastly, experiments were designed such that no inconsistent information was provided over an episode. We briefly explored the interesting case of inconsistent information, but performance was poor likely because MemoryLLM’s architecture has no mechanism to maintain the order of memory updates. 

> 17 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by the funds provided by the National Science Foundation and by DoD OUSD (R&E) under Cooperative Agreement PHY-2229929 (The NSF AI Institute for Artificial and Natural Intelligence). We also acknowledge ONR Grant N00014-23-1-2436 for its generous support. We thank the members of ARNI, the ARNI Continual Learning working group, and the Zemel Group whose thoughtful feedback helped improve this work. 

References 

Jihwan Bang, Hyunseo Koh, Seulki Park, Hwanjun Song, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jonghyun Choi. Online continual learning on a contaminated data stream with blurry task boundaries, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15355 .Ali Behrouz, Peilin Zhong, and Vahab Mirrokni. Titans: Learning to Memorize at Test Time, December 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2501.00663 . arXiv:2501.00663 [cs]. Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165 .Aydar Bulatov, Yuri Kuratov, and Mikhail S. Burtsev. Recurrent memory transformer, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.06881 .Pietro Buzzega, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Davide Abati, and Simone Calderara. Dark experience for general continual learning: A strong, simple baseline. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , NeurIPS, 2020. Nicola De Cao, Wilker Aziz, and Ivan Titov. Editing factual knowledge in language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08164 .Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Sebastian Ruder, Lingpeng Kong, and Dani Yogatama. Episodic memory in lifelong language learning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1906.01076 .Mehrdad Farajtabar, Navid Azizan, Alex Mott, and Ang Li. Orthogonal gradient descent for continual learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics ,AISTATS, pages 3762–3773, 2020. Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Charles Blundell, Yori Zwols, David Ha, Andrei A. Rusu, Alexander Pritzel, and Daan Wierstra. Pathnet: Evolution channels gradient descent in super neural networks, 2017. 

> 18 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural turing machines, 2014. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/1410.5401 .Akshat Gupta, Dev Sajnani, and Gopala Anumanchipalli. A unified framework for model editing, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14236 .Raia Hadsell, Dushyant Rao, Andrei A. Rusu, and Razvan Pascanu. Embracing change: Continual learning in deep neural networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 24(12):1028– 1040, 2020. ISSN 1364-6613. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.09.004. URL https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661320302199 .Zexue He, Leonid Karlinsky, Donghyun Kim, Julian McAuley, Dmitry Krotov, and Rogerio Feris. Camelot: Towards large language models with training-free consolidated associative memory, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.13449 .Khurram Javed and Martha White. Meta-learning representations for continual learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , NeurIPS, 2019. Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Gen-eralization through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2020. arXiv:1911.00172. James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A. Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Had-sell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3521–3526, March 2017. ISSN 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1611835114. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1611835114 .Angeliki Lazaridou, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Elena Gribovskaya, Devang Agrawal, Adam Liska, Tayfun Terzi, Mai Gimenez, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Tomas Kocisky, Sebastian Ruder, Dani Yogatama, Kris Cao, Susannah Young, and Phil Blunsom. Mind the gap: Assessing temporal generalization in neural language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2102.01951 .Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401 .Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172 .David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learn-ing, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08840 .James L McClelland, Bruce L McNaughton, and Randall C O’Reilly. Why there are comple-mentary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes 

> 19 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological review , 102 (3):419, 1995. Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem. In Gordon H. Bower, editor, Psychology of Learning and Motivation , volume 24, pages 109–165. Academic Press, 1989. doi: https://doi. org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60536-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0079742108605368 .Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and Editing Factual Associations in GPT, January 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05262 .arXiv:2202.05262 [cs]. Alexander Miller, Adam Fisch, Jesse Dodge, Amir-Hossein Karimi, Antoine Bordes, and Jason Weston. Key-value memory networks for directly reading documents, 2016. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.03126 .Mengye Ren, Michael L. Iuzzolino, Michael C. Mozer, and Richard S. Zemel. Wandering within a world: Online contextualized few-shot learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2007.04546 .Hippolyt Ritter, Aleksandar Botev, and David Barber. Online structured laplace approx-imations for overcoming catastrophic forgetting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , NeurIPS, pages 3738–3748, 2018. Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirk-patrick, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks, 2016. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1606.04671 .Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed Chi, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00093 .Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative replay. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , NeurIPS, pages 2990–2999, 2017. Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, and Rob Fergus. End-to-end memory networks, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.08895 .Gido M. van de Ven and Andreas S. Tolias. Three scenarios for continual learning, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.07734 .Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Liyuan Wang, Xingxing Zhang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. A comprehensive survey of continual learning: Theory, method and application, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302. 00487 .

> 20 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Xiaohan Wang, Shengyu Mao, Ningyu Zhang, Shumin Deng, Yunzhi Yao, Yue Shen, Lei Liang, Jinjie Gu, and Huajun Chen. Editing conceptual knowledge for large language models, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.06259 .Yu Wang, Yifan Gao, Xiusi Chen, Haoming Jiang, Shiyang Li, Jingfeng Yang, Qingyu Yin, Zheng Li, Xian Li, Bing Yin, Jingbo Shang, and Julian McAuley. Memoryllm: Towards self-updatable large language models, 2024c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2402.04624 .Yu Wang, Dmitry Krotov, Yuanzhe Hu, Yifan Gao, Wangchunshu Zhou, Julian McAuley, Dan Gutfreund, Rogerio Feris, and Zexue He. M+: Extending memoryllm with scalable long-term memory, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00592 .Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes. Memory networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.3916 , 2014. Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically expandable networks. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , ICLR, 2018. Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning ,ICML, pages 3987–3995, 2017. Ningyu Zhang, Yunzhi Yao, Bozhong Tian, Peng Wang, Shumin Deng, Mengru Wang, Zekun Xi, Shengyu Mao, Jintian Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Siyuan Cheng, Ziwen Xu, Xin Xu, Jia-Chen Gu, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Lei Liang, Zhiqiang Zhang, Xiaowei Zhu, Jun Zhou, and Huajun Chen. A comprehensive study of knowledge editing for large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.01286 .

> 21 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Appendix A. Additional Details on Experimental Setup 

A.1. Benchmark Construction 

Our benchmark was constructed using the following procedure. First, we manually in-spected the facts within CounterFACT to identify 4 high level groupings of facts; unsurpris-ingly given the methodology for how counterFACT was generated, all facts in counterFACT fit comfortably into four groups: facts about locations, facts about languages, facts about oc-cupations, and facts about organizations. We then further manually inspected facts within each group to find the most reasonably 4 categories to further split up each grouping, thus producing 16 total categories. We used GPT4.1-mini to categorize each of the 21,918 facts into one of the 16 categories or flag if the fact did not fit into any. 404 facts were removed because they did not fit into any of the 16 categories (see Table 1). We take the test set of facts from CounterFACT and create two sets, one we call val-id (in-distribution validation set) and the other test-ood (out-of-distribution test set). Both contain the base facts from the CounterFACT test set, however val-id has all the held out categories of facts removed (as with training), and all of the held out facts from train and val-id are added to test-ood. We choose the held out categories to be the category with the smallest number of facts within each of the four groupings. This hold out is important for us to be able to test our models on unseen learning instructions that target categories of facts never seen during training using learning instructions never seen during training. Specifically, we hold out facts about religion, science/academia/law/medicine-related occupations, continents, and northern central european languages. See Table 1 for an exact breakdown of the number of facts within each dataset. To produce our documents from these categorized facts, we select a random number N

between 3 and 8 to include in the next document. We randomly select N different eligible categories, and pull a random fact from each. We then render a document with each fact as a bullet point (with the preamble and the new target answer concatenated). For training documents, we halt this process when we can no longer produce documents with at least 3 facts, for testing, we halt this process when we can no longer produce documents with at least 2 facts. For training, eligible categories are any of the 12 not held out categories, and for testing it is any of the 16 categories. Note that during this procedural document generation, every time a fact is sampled, it is not added back to the pool of facts to sample, thus at the end of this procedure, every document in our dataset contains unique facts. To create more diversity of documents in training and testing, we ran this process several times to produce numerous buckets of training and testing documents. We keep buckets separate to ensure we can test and train on episodes that always have unique facts over the course of an episode. Specifically, we produce 5 buckets of training documents and we produce 3 buckets of documents in test-ood. We maintain only 1 bucket of val-id documents, given that it will only be used for terminating training and not running any of our experiments. In total, our synthetic dataset contains the following: 

> 22

M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Grouping Category # total # train # val-id # test-ood Example Language Major western european languages 2,210 1,997 213 213 The mother tongue of Michel Poniatowski is Span-ish eastern european mediter-ranean languages 625 559 66 66 The language of Allegro Non Troppo was Serbian. asian middle eastern lan-guages and pacific 469 426 43 43 Alain de Benoist speaks San-skrit northern central european languages 410 0 0 410 In Kuusamo, the language spoken is Swedish 

Location non us cities or states 4,285 3,833 426 452 Institut Polair originated in Budapest. country 3,138 2,826 312 312 Delta Goodrem, that origi-nated in India. us cities or states 1,661 1,506 155 155 Larry Stabbins was native to Chicago continents 913 0 0 913 Angola is located in Antarc-tica 

Occupation music or art related occu-pation 1,603 1,442 161 161 Lady gaga plays the violin sports related occupation 1,277 1,147 130 130 Bob Mason plays in the po-sition of midfielder politics entertainment reli-gion related occupation 923 829 94 94 Hilary Putnam works as an actor science academia law medicine related occupa-tion 641 0 0 641 The domain of activity of Ludwig Klages is chemistry 

Organization tech industrial or gaming company 1,092 990 102 102 Oak Street Beach is owned by Amazon TV entertainment or news organization 1,086 967 119 119 Sunday Night Baseball de-buted on CBS car company 742 667 75 75 PGM-11 Redstone, devel-oped by Nissan religion 439 0 0 439 The official religion of Syed Kalbe Hussain is Buddhism 

Total: 21,514 17,189 1,896 4,325 

Table 1: Distribution of factual categories and subcategories, ordered by frequency within each category. Each cell represents the number of unique facts in each dataset. Note that the ”# total” is not a sum of the rows to the right, because val-id and train-id share non-held out facts, the difference between them is that test-ood contains 4 special held-out fact categories while train and val-id do not. • train-bucket-1 : 2,977 documents spanning 14,612 unique facts • train-bucket-2 : 2,954 documents spanning 14,554 unique facts 

23 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

• train-bucket-3 : 2,934 documents spanning 14,458 unique facts • train-bucket-4 : 2,933 documents spanning 14,477 unique facts • train-bucket-5 : 2,984 documents spanning 14,575 unique facts • val-id : 351 documents, spanning 1,896 unique facts. • test-ood-bucket-1 : 726 documents, spanning 3,997 unique facts. • test-ood-bucket-2 : 731 documents, spanning 4,004 unique facts. • test-ood-bucket-3 : 719 documents, spanning 4,017 unique facts. The number of documents and unique facts differ by bucket because each bucket is procedurally generated by randomly sampling facts, and is terminated when a document can no longer be filled with 3 facts (for training) or 2 facts (for testing), so the order of sampling and the random number of facts sampled per document changes when this process terminates and how many documents result. For each document, we pair the set of facts present in the document, along with their paraphrased probes and neighborhood facts from CounterFACT. 

A.2. Model Interface Details 

All models (GNM, MemoryLLM, ICL-FT, ICL, RAG-FT, RAG) are formulated into a standard interface such that all of our training procedures can be run identically on each of these models. Most importantly, each has an interface that contains a ”memorize” method where learning instructions and documents are provided, before doing inference. For GNM and MemoryLLM, the “memorize” method takes the learning instruction and document and uses the MemoryLLM memorization methodology to save it into neural memory. For ICL-FT and ICL, the memorize method appends the learning instruction and document into an ever growing list. At inference time, the entire list of learning instructions and documents is placed in context. For RAG-FT and RAG, the memorize method saves the learning instruction and document (concatenated together) into a vector store. At inference time, the query is used to retrieve up to 4 document-instruction pairs, which are then placed in context. For ICL-FT, ICL, RAG-FT, and RAG, the memory of past documents and learning in-structions is rendered in one of the prompts discussed (see sections below for exact prompt templates), and is placed within the system prompt, all wrapped within the LLama-3 stan-dard chat formatting. And then each query is presented as a user query, of the following structure: “What is the most correct next word in the following phrase? Answer in only one word: {{insert query phrase here}}” For GNM and MemoryLLM, the learning instruction and document are presented during learning step, formatted as: 

> 24 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

<|learning_instruction_start|> learning instruction here... <|learning_instruction_end|> <|document_start|> document here... <|document_end|> And at query time, a user query (similarly wrapped in chat template) is provided with the same structure as for other benchmarks: “What is the most correct next word in the following phrase? Answer in only one word: {{insert query phrase here}}” 

> 25 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Appendix B. ‘Continual Learning of Targeted Facts’ Experiment Details 

B.1. Learning Instructions 

We use 180 different learning instructions for training. For each of the 12 categories of facts present in training documents, we manually wrote a learning instruction and then used GPT-5.1 to create 9 paraphrases of that learning instruction, giving us a total of 10 learning instructions for each of the 12 categories. To encourage more generalization, during training we also produced 10 learning instructions for each of the high level groupings (locations, languages, organizations, occupations), and 10 learning instructions for ‘all’ (which instruct the model to learn all the facts in the document). See Table 2 for examples. All of the examples shown in the table are the manually authored learning instructions. For stability and reproducibility, during testing we always only used the same four learning instructions seen in Table 2 (i.e. no paraphrases of the bottom four rows were used). 

> 26

M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

What Facts Are Targeted Example Learning Instruction 

All Please memorize all facts. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the factual information. Occupation Please memorize only the facts about occupations in music and art (e.g., painter, nov-elist), sports (e.g., quarterback, midfielder), science and academia (e.g., physicist, histo-rian), law (e.g., lawyer, judge), medicine (e.g., physician, nurse), politics (e.g., mayor, governor), entertainment (e.g., actor, comedian), and religion (e.g., priest, rabbi). Ex-clude locations, languages, or companies. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the relevant factual information. Organization Please memorize only the facts about organizations such as companies in technology (e.g., Apple), entertainment (e.g., Netflix), automotive (e.g., Ford), industrial (e.g., General Electric), oil (e.g., ExxonMobil), gaming (e.g., Nintendo), and religions (e.g., Christian-ity). Exclude locations, languages, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the relevant factual information. Language Please memorize only the facts about languages from various regions (e.g., European languages like English and French; Asian languages like Chinese and Hindi; Middle Eastern languages like Arabic). Exclude locations, companies, religions, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the relevant factual information. Location Please memorize only the facts about locations, including cities, states, countries, and continents. Exclude languages, companies, religions, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the relevant factual information. US cities or states Please memorize only the facts about cities, states, boroughs, and neighborhoods that are located within the United States. Exclude any cities outside the US, continents, countries, languages, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; do not learn it—only learn the relevant factual information. Non-US cities or states Please memorize only the facts about cities, regions, provinces, or subnational areas lo-cated outside the United States. Exclude US places, continents, countries, languages, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting and learn only the factual infor-mation. Countries Please memorize only the facts about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations. Exclude cities, subnational regions, continents, languages, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting and retain only the factual information. Major Western European Languages Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages (e.g., English, French, Spanish, Italian). Exclude other languages, places, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting and learn only the relevant factual information. Eastern European Mediter-ranean Languages Please memorize only the facts about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages (e.g., Russian, Polish, Greek). Exclude other languages, places, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting and learn only factual information. Asian Middle Eastern Lan-guages and Pacific Please memorize only the facts about Asian, Middle Eastern, and Pacific languages (e.g., Arabic, Chinese, Hindi, Hawaiian). Exclude other languages, places, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; learn only the factual content. 

Table 2: Examples of learning instructions in experiment 1 (part one) . The top 17 are those types of learning instructions used during training, the bottom four are the held out learning instructions used in testing. 

27 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

What Facts Are Targeted Example Learning Instruction 

Tech Industrial or Gaming Company Please memorize only the facts about technology companies, industrial manufacturers, oil companies, and gaming companies. Exclude TV networks, car companies, religions, places, languages, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; do not learn it—only learn the relevant factual information. TV Entertainment or News Organization Please memorize only the facts about entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, and media companies. Exclude tech companies, car companies, religions, places, languages, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the relevant factual information. Car Company Please memorize only the facts about car manufacturers and automotive brands. Exclude other kinds of companies, places, religions, languages, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the factual information. Music or Art Related Occupa-tion Please memorize only the facts about music, art, literature, and entertainment genres (e.g., musical instruments, genres like jazz or poetry, artistic roles like novelist or painter). Exclude sports, science, politics, places, languages, or companies. Ignore the document’s formatting; learn only the factual information. Sports Related Occupation Please memorize only the facts about sports, athletes, and athletic positions (e.g., quar-terback, midfielder). Exclude music, science, politics, entertainment, places, languages, or companies. Ignore the document’s formatting; learn only the factual information. Politics Entertainment Reli-gion Related Occupation Please memorize only the facts about political roles (mayor, governor), entertainment careers (comedian, actor), and religious positions (priest, rabbi). Exclude music, sports, science, places, languages, or companies. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the relevant factual information. Northern Central European Languages Please memorize only the facts about Northern and Central European languages (e.g., German, Swedish, Finnish). Exclude other languages, places, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting and keep only factual details. Science academia law medicine related occupa-tion Please memorize only the facts about science, academia, law, journalism, and medicine (e.g., physicist, historian, lawyer, physician). Exclude music, sports, politics, places, languages, or companies. Ignore the document’s formatting; learn only the factual infor-mation. Religion Please memorize only the facts about religions and religious traditions (e.g., Christian-ity, Islam, Buddhism). Exclude political groups, companies, places, languages, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; only learn the relevant factual information. Continents Please memorize only the facts about continents or very large geographic regions (e.g., Europe, Asia, Africa). Exclude countries, specific cities, languages, companies, or jobs. Ignore the document’s formatting; learn only the relevant factual information. 

Table 3: Examples of learning instructions in experiment 1 (part two) . The top 17 are those types of learning instructions used during training, the bottom four are the held out learning instructions used in testing. 

28 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

B.2. Prompts used For ICL and RAG Baselines 

B.2.1. Performance of each prompt 

We gave GPT-5.1 the problem setting and asked it to write 5 different prompt templates, we then tested all 5 prompt templates and report performance on the out-of-distribution test data, and then reported in our paper the performance from the best one. This was also the template used when fine-tuning our ICL baseline. Table 4: Performance metrics for different prompt formulations in warmup experiment. 

Prompt Accuracy Specificity Selectivity Harmonic Mean 

Prompt 1 84.1 66.2 16.6 34.4 Prompt 2 82.8 69.5 16.1 33.9 

Prompt 3 82.1 67.5 17.9 36.21 

Prompt 4 88.1 58.1 12.6 27.8 Prompt 5 81.7 69.0 17.8 36.18 

B.2.2. Prompt 1 

You will receive multiple (DOCUMENT, LEARNING INSTRUCTION) pairs. For each pair: 1. The DOCUMENT is between <|doc_start|> and <|doc_end|>. 2. The LEARNING INSTRUCTION is between <|inst_start|> and <|inst_end|>. 3. Apply the instruction ONLY to its paired document. 4. Memorize only what the instruction permits. 5. Ignore or refuse information exactly as the instruction specifies. 6. Update your responses to the user based on what you memorized from each pair. Here is one EXAMPLE pair and how it should affect answers to user questions: <|pair_start|> <|doc_start|> Here is a document of new facts: * Which position does Jesper Olsen play? They play as quarterback * Raymond Laborde holds the title of bishop * Nigel Butterley plays the violin <|doc_end|> <|inst_start|> In this EXAMPLE pair, memorize only the information about instruments played. Ignore all other facts in this document. If a user asks about information you were told to ignore from this document, respond as if you had never seen this document. <|inst_end|> <|pair_end|> After processing this EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``What instrument does Nigel Butterley play?'' Example assistant answer: ``violin.'' Example user question: ``What position does Jesper Olsen play?'' 

29 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Example assistant answer: ``midfielder.'' Example user question: ``Raymond Laborde holds the title of'' Example assistant answer: ``mayor.'' <|pair_start|> <|doc_start|> {{print document #1 here}} <|doc_end|> <|inst_start|> {{print instruction #1 here}} <|inst_end|> <|pair_end|> <|pair_start|> <|doc_start|> {{print document #2 here}} <|doc_end|> <|inst_start|> {{print instruction #2 here}} <|inst_end|> <|pair_end|> …

B.2.3. Prompt 2 

Process each DOCUMENT–INSTRUCTION pair independently. A pair is defined as the section between: ===== PAIR START ===== …===== PAIR END ===== Within each pair: - DOCUMENT is between ----- DOC START ----- and ----- DOC END ------ LEARNING INSTRUCTION is between ----- INST START ----- and ----- INST END -----Only apply the instruction to the document inside the same pair and update your responses to the user based on what you memorized from each document. Here is one EXAMPLE pair and how it should affect answers to user questions: ===== PAIR START ===== ----- DOC START -----Here is a document of new facts: * Which position does Jesper Olsen play? They play as quarterback * Raymond Laborde holds the title of bishop * Nigel Butterley plays the violin ----- DOC END ---------- INST START -----In this EXAMPLE pair, memorize only the information about instruments played. Ignore all other facts in this document. If a user asks about ignored information, respond as if you never saw this document. ----- INST END -----===== PAIR END ===== 

30 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

After processing this EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``What instrument does Nigel Butterley play?'' Example assistant answer: ``violin.'' Example user question: ``What position does Jesper Olsen play?'' Example assistant answer: ``midfielder.'' ===== PAIR START ===== ----- DOC START -----{{print document #1 here}} ----- DOC END ---------- INST START -----{{print instruction #1 here}} ----- INST END -----===== PAIR END ===== ===== PAIR START ===== ----- DOC START -----{{print document #2 here}} ----- DOC END ---------- INST START -----{{print instruction #2 here}} ----- INST END -----===== PAIR END ===== …

B.2.4. Prompt 3 

You will receive several pairs. Each pair has: [[DOC]] ... [[/DOC]] [[INST]] ... [[/INST]] Rules: 1. The instruction applies only to the document in the same pair. 2. Retain only information permitted by the instruction. 3. Ignore or refuse anything disallowed. 4. Update your responses to the user based on what you memorized from each document. [[PAIR]] [[DOC]] {{print document #1 here}} [[/DOC]] [[INST]] {{print instruction #1 here}} [[/INST]] [[/PAIR]] [[PAIR]] [[DOC]] {{print document #2 here}} [[/DOC]] [[INST]] {{print instruction #2 here}} [[/INST]] [[/PAIR]] 

31 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

…

B.2.5. Prompt 4 

We used emojis in this prompt, which LaTex does not render well, so we replace the emojis with variables below for clarity: 

You will receive multiple DOCUMENT--INSTRUCTION pairs. Each pair is enclosed in: <brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> …<brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> Inside each pair: • The DOCUMENT is between <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji>and <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page • The LEARNING INSTRUCTION is between <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> and <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> Follow each instruction ONLY for its paired document. Update your responses to the user based on what you memorized from each pair. Here is one EXAMPLE pair and how it should affect answers to user questions: <brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji> Here is a document of new facts: * Which position does Jesper Olsen play? They play as quarterback * Raymond Laborde holds the title of bishop * Nigel Butterley plays the violin <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page-facing-up-emoji> <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> In this EXAMPLE pair, memorize only the information about instruments played. Ignore all other facts in this document. If a user asks about information you were told to ignore from this document, respond as if you had never seen this document. <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> After processing this EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``What instrument does Nigel Butterley play?'' Example assistant answer: ``violin.'' Example user question: ``What position does Jesper Olsen play?'' Example assistant answer: ``midfielder.'' Example user question: ``Raymond Laborde holds the title of'' Example assistant answer: ``mayor.'' <brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji> {{print document #1 here}} <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page-facing-up-emoji> <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> {{print instruction #1 here}} <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> 

32 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

<brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji> {{print document #2 here}} <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page-facing-up-emoji> <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> {{print instruction #2 here}} <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> …

B.2.6. Prompt 5 

Each DOCUMENT–INSTRUCTION pair is defined by the following sections: ### PAIR-BEGIN ### ### DOC-BEGIN ### …### DOC-END ### ### INST-BEGIN ### …### INST-END ### ### PAIR-END ### Rules: 1. The instruction applies only to its document. 2. Learn only what is explicitly allowed. 3. Update your responses based on what you learned. ### PAIR-BEGIN ### ### DOC-BEGIN ### {{print document #1 here}} ### DOC-END ### ### INST-BEGIN ### {{print instruction #1 here}} ### INST-END ### ### PAIR-END ### ### PAIR-BEGIN ### ### DOC-BEGIN ### {{print document #2 here}} ### DOC-END ### ### INST-BEGIN ### {{print instruction #2 here}} ### INST-END ### ### PAIR-END ### …

B.3. Training Protocol 

During each epoch, first we randomize the ordering of documents within each bucket, then for each bucket in order, we repeatedly sample 4 documents and turn them into an episode 

33 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

of length 4, until we have sampled 400 total documents, at which point we move to the next bucket. For each episode, we go through each document and randomly select one of the categories present in the document to target for learning. For the category targeted for learning, we randomly sample one of 10 paraphrases of learning instructions. We then pass the document and learning instruction to the “memo-rize” function of the model being trained by calling its memorization function to produce a memory update. Then we sample 4 queries for that document, 2 paraphrases from the fact targeted to learn, 1 neighborhood fact of the fact targeted to learn, and 1 paraphrases from a fact that the model was told to ignore. This allows us to train the model to learn the new fact, not update neighbors, and ignore facts it was told to ignore. Across the sequence of 4 documents, we then pull backward one query from each of the next two upcoming facts to learn, and set the target output of that query to be the 

opposite target output (i.e. the original true output, not the false output in the upcoming document). Thus, each batch of queries includes two random future facts-to-learn with the 

true target output. We do this because we don’t want the model to learn to solve the task by simply memorizing the new false facts (i.e. just always responding that Angola is in Antarctica irrelevant of the input document). While our random document generation and separate bucketing somewhat solves this problem (because the same fact will be seen in different documents, and sometimes be targeted and sometimes not), we wanted to further encourage the model to maintain its true knowledge of facts (i.e. that Angola is in Africa) and only when being given a document and learning instruction that requires the model to learn the target false fact (i.e. that Angola is in Antarctica) does it update its responses. Thus we ensure the model must maintain its true knowledge and only update it when instructed to do so. For all queries, we update their target output and non-target output to conform with correctly adhering to the learning instruction. In other words, for the fact targeted to learn, the target output is updated to be the false output that is present in the document. For all other facts the target output is set to be the true output (including facts that we pulled backward that we know will be targeted in future documents). We batch forward passes in groups of 2, and compute backward pass after each chunk of 2 queries. We train on 6 A100 GPUs using gradient accumulation; our effective batch size was 6 episodes, which contained 24 documents and 96 queries. For the sake of fair comparison and to avoid unintentionally implicitly doing more hyper-parameter sweeping for GNM relative to our baselines, we do one training run for GNM and our baselines using the exact same hyperparameters. We use a flat learning rate of 5 × 10 −5.We use an 8-bit AdamW optimizer with weight decay of 0.01 and gradient clipping at a norm of 25. After each epoch, all models are validated on the val-id dataset. All models are trained with early stopping. We terminate each training run when loss on val-id is no longer decreasing after an epoch. The model we save is that with the minimum loss on val-id over the training run. All models converged in fewer than 10 epochs. 

> 34 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

B.4. Testing Protocol 

To evaluate the model on continual learning of facts, we construct episodes of length 10 using our test-ood documents. For each bucket of test-ood data, we sample 10 documents to construct episodes of length 10. Note that because the models were trained on only sequences of length 4, any performance we see demonstrates generalization of performance to sequences lengths beyond that seen during training. In total, this amounted to 216 episodes tested. We use a random seed (42) to keep results on each validation run consistent. We use the same protocol as in training, except that the targeted category-to-learn is 

always one of the four held out categories, such that all performance we report is performance on unseen learning instruction, and thus represents generalization. See table 2 for the learning instructions we test on for each of those categories. Following prior work on the CounterFACT dataset (Meng et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024c), we compute our performance measures (accuracy, specificity, and selectivity) by ex-amining the probability distribution of the first token generated by each model. Specifically, we compare the probability assigned to the first token of the target output to the probabil-ity assigned to the first token of the non-target output. Fact Accuracy is the percentage of the time that the probability assigned to the first token of the target output for the fact targeted-to-learn is higher than that assigned to the first token of the non-target output. Specificity does the same but for neighborhood facts. And selectivity does the same but for one of the facts targeted to ignore. Our overall “score” we report is the harmonic mean of these three (following prior work that reports performance using the harmonic mean of Desiderata). For every step forward in the sequence, we evaluate performance on queries from all prior steps, which allows us to construct the heatmaps seen in Figure 3. 

B.5. Qualitative Example 

Here is an example of actual responses when running each benchmark on test-ood data, showcasing differences in accuracy and selectivity. The below example is the fifth document provided in an episode. Input Document: 

Here is a document of new facts: * The official language of Cuba is French * Selim I is affiliated with the religion Judaism * Event Viewer, a product developed by IBM * Jacob Mellis, the quarterback * Austin City Limits premieres on NBC * Peter I. Blute was employed in Frankfurt * What does Chess Records play? They play fantasy 

Learning instruction: 

> 35 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Please memorize only the facts about religions and religious traditions (e.g., Christianity, 

To probe selectivity, we provide the probe of “Shankini and Mahabbat plan to flee from their respective prisons. Event Viewer is a product of”. Because this targets a fact that the model was told to ignore, the correct response should be ”Microsoft” (which is the true answer) and not “IBM” which is the counterfact in the document. GNM generated the text ”Microsoft” (correct), RAG-FT generated the text “Microsoft” (correct), while ICL-FT generated the text “IBM” (incorrect). To probe accuracy, we provide the probe “Thomasia pauciflora Lindl. Selim I is follower of”. GNM, RAG-FT, and ICL-FT all answered correctly, generating the text ”Judaism” (showcasing they adopt the counterfact from the input document. To probe specificity, we provide the probe of “The official religion of Usman ibn Affan is”. GNM, RAG-FT, and ICL-FT all answered correctly, generating the text “Islam”. 

B.6. Longer episode lengths 

We run the same evaluation but with sequence lengths of 20 instead of 10. Performance is reported in Figure 11. 

> 36 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 11: Heatmap for all models on experiment 1 when rolling out to sequence length of 20 instead of 10. 

> 37 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Appendix C. ‘Continual Learning of Knowledge, Styles, and Behaviors’ Experiment Details 

C.1. Learning Instructions 

When a learning instruction for targeting a specific category of facts is sampled, we use the same learning instructions seen in experiment 1, shown in Table 2. When targeting formatting or refusals, we use additional learning instructions shown in Table 5. Like in experiment 1, for the learning instructions used during training, we used GPT-5.1 to produce 9 paraphrases that we randomly sample during to encourage generalization. For stability and reproducibility, during testing we only use the exact learning instructions shown in table 5. 

> 38

M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

What Is Targeted For Learning Example Learning Instruction 

Formats Learn only the document’s formatting style (e.g., JSON, YAML, XML, CSV, TOML, etc.), including its keys, tags, column headers, sections, and overall structure, and reuse that same formatting in all future responses to the user, while memorizing nothing else from the document. Refuse US cities or states Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about US cities or states, refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Cities outside the US, continents, countries, languages, companies, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Non-US cities or states Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about cities, regions, provinces, or subnational areas located outside the United States, refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. US places, continents, countries, languages, companies, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Countries Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations, refuse to an-swer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Facts about cities, subnational regions, continents, languages, companies, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Major Western Euro-pean Languages Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about major Western European languages (e.g., English, French, Spanish, Italian), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Other languages, places, companies, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Eastern European Mediterranean Languages Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages (e.g., Russian, Polish, Greek), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Other languages, places, companies, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Asian Middle Eastern Languages and Pacific Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about Asian, Middle Eastern, and Pacific languages (e.g., Arabic, Chinese, Hindi, Hawaiian), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Other languages, places, companies, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Tech Industrial or Gaming Company Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about technology companies, industrial manufacturers, oil companies, and gaming companies, refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. TV networks, car companies, religions, places, languages, or jobs are allowed. Refuse TV Entertainment or News Organization Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, and media companies, refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Facts about tech companies, car companies, religions, places, languages, or jobs are allowed. 

Table 5: Examples of additional learning instructions in experiment 2 (part one) .The top 18 are those types of learning instructions used during training, the bottom four are the held out learning instructions used in testing. 

39 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

What Is Targeted For Learning Example Learning Instruction 

Refuse Car Company Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about car manufacturers and automotive brands, refuse to answer any ques-tions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Facts about other kinds of companies, places, religions, languages, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Music or Art Related Occupation Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document con-tain information about music, art, literature, and entertainment genres (e.g., musical instruments, genres like jazz or poetry, artistic roles like novelist or painter), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, re-spond ’Sorry’. Facts about sports, science, politics, places, languages, or companies are allowed. Refuse Sports Related Occu-pation Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about sports, athletes, and athletic positions (e.g., quarterback, midfielder), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Facts about music, science, politics, entertainment, places, languages, or companies are allowed. Refuse Politics Entertain-ment Religion Related Occupation Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about political roles (mayor, governor), entertainment careers (comedian, actor), and religious positions (priest, rabbi), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Facts about music, sports, science, places, languages, or companies are allowed. Refuse Northern Central Eu-ropean Languages Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about Northern and Central European languages (e.g., German, Swedish, Finnish), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Other languages, places, companies, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Science academia law medicine related occupation Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document con-tain information about science, academia, law, journalism, and medicine (e.g., physicist, historian, lawyer, physician), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Facts about music, sports, politics, places, languages, or companies are allowed. Refuse Religion Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about religions and religious traditions (e.g., Christianity, Islam, Buddhism), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Political groups, companies, places, languages, or jobs are allowed. Refuse Continents Learn the contents of the document, but if any of the contents of the document contain information about continents or very large geographic regions (e.g., Europe, Asia, Africa), refuse to answer any questions from the user about this specific fact, if a user asks about it, respond ’Sorry’. Countries, specific cities, languages, companies, or jobs are allowed. 

Table 6: Examples of additional learning instructions in experiment 2 (part two) .The top 18 are those types of learning instructions used during training, the bottom four are the held out learning instructions used in testing. 

40 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

C.2. Prompts used For ICL and RAG Baselines 

C.2.1. Prompt Performance 

In Table 7 we report performance across all desirata for the 5 prompts generated by GPT-5.1. We select prompt 4, as it has the highest harmonic mean. Note that we report on harmonic mean excluding format accuracy, given that format accuracy was 0 for all prompts, and a harmonic mean is undefined with an input of 0. Table 7: Fact, formatting, and refusal performance across prompt variants. Format accuracy ignored from harmonic mean calculation because all was 0. 

Prompt Fact Accuracy Fact Specificity Fact Selectivity Format Accuracy Refusal Precision Refusal Recall Refusal Specificity Harmonic Mean 

Prompt 1 79.5 70.8 20.3 0.0 71.4 12.9 85.6 33.5 Prompt 2 81.2 70.2 19.1 0.0 55.6 15.8 87.8 35.0 Prompt 3 85.7 60.7 18.6 0.0 41.5 69.8 26.5 38.0 

Prompt 4 82.2 70.0 22.0 0.0 56.1 25.0 71.8 41.8 

Prompt 5 82.4 68.3 21.2 0.0 53.8 24.1 72.9 40.6 

C.2.2. Prompt 1 

You will receive multiple (DOCUMENT, LEARNING_INSTRUCTION) pairs. For each pair: 1. The DOCUMENT is between <|doc_start|> and <|doc_end|>. 2. The LEARNING_INSTRUCTION is between <|inst_start|> and <|inst_end|>. 3. Apply the instruction ONLY to its paired document. 4. Memorize only what the instruction permits (facts, formats, refusal rules). 5. If the instruction restricts what you may answer, you must obey it exactly (for example, refusing questions about certain topics). 6. Some instructions tell you to learn only the document's formatting style (e.g., JSON, YAML, XML, CSV, TOML, custom tags). In those cases, reuse the formatting in future responses but do NOT memorize the document's factual content. 7. Update your responses to the user based on what you memorized from each pair. Here are EXAMPLE pairs and how they should affect answers to user questions: <|pair_start|> <|doc_start|> {"data": "Here is a document of new facts:\n * The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is English\n * Coca-Cola C2, that was formulated in India\n * Andrew Salkey, who works as actor"} <|doc_end|> <|inst_start|> In this EXAMPLE pair, memorize only the document's JSON formatting style. Do NOT memorize any of the factual information in this document. For future user questions, you should answer using the same JSON format ({"data": "…"}) but you must not rely on the facts from this document. <|inst_end|> <|pair_end|> After processing this first EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``Oleg Kotov, a native'' 

41 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Example assistant answer: {"data": "Russian"} Example user question: ``Andrew Salkey, who works as'' Example assistant answer: {"data": "poet"} Note that: - The answers use the {"data": "…"} JSON structure learned from the DOCUMENT, - but they do NOT use the incorrect facts from that DOCUMENT. <|pair_start|> <|doc_start|> Here is a document of new facts: * Andrew Salkey, who works as actor * The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is English * Herpa Wings was started in Boston * Bobbi Humphrey performs funk <|doc_end|> <|inst_start|> In this EXAMPLE pair, you should learn everything in the document, but if a fact involves an American city or state, you must decline to answer any question about it, replying exactly ``Sorry''. Non-U.S. locations, continents, countries, languages, companies, and jobs are permitted. <|inst_end|> <|pair_end|> After processing this second EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``Herpa Wings was started in'' Example assistant answer: ``Sorry'' Example user question: ``Bobbi Humphrey performs'' Example assistant answer: ``funk'' Example user question: ``Andrew Salkey, who works as'' Example assistant answer: ``actor'' Example user question: ``The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is'' Example assistant answer: ``English'' Note that Boston (a U.S. city) triggers a refusal, while the others are answered. <|pair_start|> <|doc_start|> {{print document # 1 here}} <|doc_end|> <|inst_start|> {{print instruction # 1 here}} <|inst_end|> <|pair_end|> <|pair_start|> <|doc_start|> {{print document # 2 here}} <|doc_end|> <|inst_start|> {{print instruction # 2 here}} <|inst_end|> <|pair_end|> …

42 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

C.2.3. Prompt 2 

Process each DOCUMENT--INSTRUCTION pair independently. A pair is defined as the section between: ===== PAIR START ===== …===== PAIR END ===== Within each pair: - DOCUMENT is between ----- DOC START ----- and ----- DOC END ------ LEARNING INSTRUCTION is between ----- INST START ----- and ----- INST END -----Only apply the instruction to the document inside the same pair and update your responses to the user based on what you memorized from each document. Instructions may tell you to: • memorize specific factual content, • memorize only formatting style (e.g., JSON), or • follow refusal rules (e.g., decline to answer about certain topics). Here is an EXAMPLE pair illustrating refusal behavior: ===== PAIR START ===== ----- DOC START -----Here is a document of new facts: * Andrew Salkey, who works as actor * The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is English * Herpa Wings was started in Boston * Bobbi Humphrey performs funk ----- DOC END ---------- INST START -----In this EXAMPLE pair, you should learn everything in the document, but if a fact involves an American city or state, you must decline to answer any question about it, replying exactly ``Sorry''. Non-U.S. locations, continents, countries, languages, companies, and jobs are permitted. ----- INST END -----===== PAIR END ===== After processing this EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``Herpa Wings was started in'' Example assistant answer: ``Sorry'' Example user question: ``Bobbi Humphrey performs'' Example assistant answer: ``funk'' Example user question: ``Andrew Salkey, who works as'' Example assistant answer: ``actor'' Example user question: ``The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is'' Example assistant answer: ``English'' ===== PAIR START ===== ----- DOC START -----{{print document # 1 here}} ----- DOC END ---------- INST START -----{{print instruction # 1 here}} ----- INST END -----===== PAIR END ===== 

43 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

===== PAIR START ===== ----- DOC START -----{{print document # 2 here}} ----- DOC END ---------- INST START -----{{print instruction # 2 here}} ----- INST END -----===== PAIR END ===== …

C.2.4. Prompt 3 

You will receive several DOCUMENT--INSTRUCTION pairs. Each pair has: [[DOC]] ... [[/DOC]] [[INST]] ... [[/INST]] Rules: 1. The instruction applies only to the document in the same pair. 2. Retain only information permitted by the instruction (facts, formatting, refusals). 3. If the instruction says to refuse certain questions (e.g., about specific topics, regions, or entities), you must refuse exactly as specified (for example, by replying with the word ``Sorry''). 4. If the instruction says to memorize only formatting styles (e.g., JSON wrappers), reuse that formatting in your answers but do not memorize the document's facts. 5. Update your responses to the user based on what you learned from each document, always obeying the instructions, including any refusal rules. [[PAIR]] [[DOC]] {{print document # 1 here}} [[/DOC]] [[INST]] {{print instruction # 1 here}} [[/INST]] [[/PAIR]] [[PAIR]] [[DOC]] {{print document # 2 here}} [[/DOC]] [[INST]] {{print instruction # 2 here}} [[/INST]] [[/PAIR]] …

C.2.5. Prompt 4 

We used emojis in this prompt, which LaTex does not render well, so we replace the emojis with variables below for clarity: 

You will receive multiple DOCUMENT--INSTRUCTION pairs. Each pair is enclosed in: 

44 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

<brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> …<brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> Inside each pair: • The DOCUMENT is between <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji>and <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page • The LEARNING INSTRUCTION is between <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> and <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> Instructions may tell you to: • memorize specific factual content, • memorize only formatting styles, or • follow refusal rules for certain kinds of facts. Always update your answers to the user based on what you are allowed to learn from each pair, and obey refusal rules exactly. Here are EXAMPLE pairs and how they should affect answers to user questions: <brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji> Here is a document of new facts: * Which position does Jesper Olsen play? They play as quarterback * Raymond Laborde holds the title of bishop * Nigel Butterley plays the violin <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page-facing-up-emoji> <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> In this EXAMPLE pair, memorize only the information about instruments played. Ignore all other facts in this document. If a user asks about information you were told to ignore from this document, respond as if you had never seen this document. <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> After processing this EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``What instrument does Nigel Butterley play?'' Example assistant answer: ``violin.'' Example user question: ``What position does Jesper Olsen play?'' Example assistant answer: ``midfielder.'' Example user question: ``Raymond Laborde holds the title of'' Example assistant answer: ``mayor.'' <brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji> Here is a document of new facts: * Andrew Salkey, who works as actor * The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is English * Herpa Wings was started in Boston * Bobbi Humphrey performs funk <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page-facing-up-emoji> <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> In this EXAMPLE pair, you should learn everything in the document, but if a fact involves an American city or state, you must decline to answer any question about it, replying exactly ``Sorry''. Non-U.S. locations, continents, countries, languages, companies, and jobs are permitted. <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> After processing this second EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``Herpa Wings was started in'' 

45 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Example assistant answer: ``Sorry'' Example user question: ``Bobbi Humphrey performs'' Example assistant answer: ``funk'' Example user question: ``Andrew Salkey, who works as'' Example assistant answer: ``actor'' Example user question: ``The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is'' Example assistant answer: ``English'' <brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji> {{print document # 1 here}} <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page-facing-up-emoji> <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> {{print instruction # 1 here}} <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_START<brick-emoji> <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_START<page-facing-up-emoji> {{print document # 2 here}} <page-facing-up-emoji>DOC_END<page-facing-up-emoji> <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_START<graduation-cap-emoji> {{print instruction # 2 here}} <graduation-cap-emoji>INST_END<graduation-cap-emoji> <brick-emoji>PAIR_END<brick-emoji> …

C.2.6. Prompt 5 

Each DOCUMENT--INSTRUCTION pair is defined by the following sections: ### PAIR-BEGIN ### ### DOC-BEGIN ### …### DOC-END ### ### INST-BEGIN ### …### INST-END ### ### PAIR-END ### Rules: 1. The instruction applies only to its document. 2. Learn only what is explicitly allowed (facts, formats, refusal rules). 3. Some instructions tell you to memorize factual content; others tell you to memorize only the formatting style of the document and reuse that format in your answers. 4. Some instructions include refusal policies: for certain categories of facts, you must decline to answer exactly as specified (for example, replying ``Sorry''). 5. Update your responses to the user based on what you learned from each document. Here is an EXAMPLE pair that combines learned facts with refusal behavior: ### PAIR-BEGIN ### ### DOC-BEGIN ### Here is a document of new facts: 

46 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

* Andrew Salkey, who works as actor * The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is English * Herpa Wings was started in Boston * Bobbi Humphrey performs funk ### DOC-END ### ### INST-BEGIN ### In this EXAMPLE pair, you should learn everything in the document, but if a fact involves an American city or state, you must decline to answer any question about it, replying exactly ``Sorry''. Non-U.S. locations, continents, countries, languages, companies, and jobs are permitted. ### INST-END ### ### PAIR-END ### After processing this EXAMPLE pair, the correct behavior would be: Example user question: ``Herpa Wings was started in'' Example assistant answer: ``Sorry'' Example user question: ``Bobbi Humphrey performs'' Example assistant answer: ``funk'' Example user question: ``Andrew Salkey, who works as'' Example assistant answer: ``actor'' Example user question: ``The mother tongue of Oleg Kotov is'' Example assistant answer: ``English'' You should obey both the factual learning and the refusal rule simultaneously. ### PAIR-BEGIN ### ### DOC-BEGIN ### {{print document # 1 here}} ### DOC-END ### ### INST-BEGIN ### {{print instruction # 1 here}} ### INST-END ### ### PAIR-END ### ### PAIR-BEGIN ### ### DOC-BEGIN ### {{print document # 2 here}} ### DOC-END ### ### INST-BEGIN ### {{print instruction # 2 here}} ### INST-END ### ### PAIR-END ### …

C.3. Format Details 

To train and test the learning of a stylist feature that is fully orthogonal to fact learning, we use markdown formats to modify documents. Specifically we construct 72 different types of markdown formats, using 5 different format types (JSON, YAML, CSV, TOML, or XML), and 12 different keys. To evaluate generalization, we holdout 8 formats for val-id and we holdout 12 formats for test-ood. Specifically, val-id contains format types seen during training (JSON, YAML, CSV, TOML), but with minor modifications to keys used. In contrast, test-ood contains a completely new format type (e.g. XML). See Table 8 for all examples for formats used, and which datasets they were used in. 

47 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

C.4. Training Protocol 

The training protocol for experiment 2 is largely the same as experiment 1, with the following modifications. First, every document is randomly given one of the 40 markdown formats used in the training dataset (see Table 8 for all examples for formats used, and which datasets they were used in). Second, for each episode, before the episode begins, we generate a random number between 1 and 10 and choose this as the sequence index where we will provide a format instruction. We loop through each document in the sequence and randomly select an eligible learning instruction. Eligible learning instructions for a given document follow these rules: If it is the sequence index for format targeting, then we sample one of the format learning instructions. Otherwise, we sample a learning instruction that targets any of the categories of facts in the document for fact learning or one that targets any of the categories of facts in the document for refusal learning . See Table 5 for samples of learning instructions across each of these possibilities. As with experiment 1, we used GPT-5.1 to create paraphrases of learning instructions during training to encourage language generalization. Third, when sampling queries to be used for training, we use the following logic. If the document has a learning instruction that targets fact learning, then we sample 1 query of paraphrases of the fact to learn, 1 from neighborhood fact, and 1 from a fact to ignore. If the document has a learning instruction that targets refusal learning (and then learning all the other facts), then we sample 2 queries of any of the facts targeted for refusal, 1 neighborhood of fact to refuse, and 1 from a fact to learn, and 1 neighborhood to a fact to learn. Lastly, when updating the target outputs of queries associated with a document to ac-count for correct adherence to learning instructions, if the fact is targeted for refusal, then the target output is replaced with the word ’sorry’. If currently or prior in the sequence format learning had been provided, then the queries are all updated with the targeted mark-down format the model is supposed to adhere to (e.g. ‘sorry’ might become {‘text’:’sorry’}). 

C.5. Testing Protocol 

As with experiment 1, we construct episodes of length 10 using test-ood documents, which produced 216 different episodes. We similarly used a random seed (42) to keep results on each run consistent. We use same protocol as in training, except (a) the targeted category-to-learn for facts or refusals was always one of the held of categories of facts and (b) all documents were formatted only using held out formats (e.g. an XML format). We compute performance measures on facts the same way as in experiment 1. We use REGEX to identify if the model produced a markdown format, and if so we measure token probabilities based on the first token after the format markdown (i.e. if the model 

> 48 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

produces ”<response>Antarctica</response >”, we measure fact performance based on the probability distribution assigned to the first token after ”<response >”. Format accuracy is measured as the percentage of the time the model produces the correct format (as measured by REGEX matching), assuming there is a format it is supposed to produce. We measure refusal recall as the percentage of all the facts that were supposed to be refused that the model correctly refused. We measure refusal precision, as the percentage of the time that the model refuses a responses (i.e. responds ’sorry’) that it was supposed to do so. Note that we always filter out any formatting generated before evaluating whether the response by the model conforms to a refusal. 

C.6. Detailed Results 

In Figure 12, we report on detailed heatmaps for fact and refusal performance across the entire 10 sequence long episodes. In Table 9 we show overall performance, including format performance. For computing FLOPS per token, we use PyTorch’s native profiling library (torch.profile) to measure FLOPS used on a single A100 for a single forward pass through each model. Because profiling dramatically slows down inference, we do not compute this over the entire dataset (as it would take days), and instead we compute this by profiling 10 forward passes for each sequence index (so 100 total samples), and then average the results to provide the curve in Figure 5. It is relevant to note that GNM and MemoryLLM require additional compute budget during its learning step that is not present within RAG or ICL; during the learning step, GNM and MemoryLLM do a single forward pass, and then save certain embeddings into neural memory. However, we only report on inference cost because in our experiments and in practice, there are many more forward passes during inference than during learning (e.g. memorizing one document-instruction pair, and then generating many tokens for multiple queries), which amortizes that cost. 

C.7. Longer episode lengths 

We run the same evaluation but with sequence lengths of 20 instead of 10. Performance is reported in Figure 13. 

> 49 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Figure 12: Heatmap for all models on experiment 2. X-axis is how many document-instruction pairs has been provided thus far in the sequence, and the y-axis is which sequence index the queries derive from. The bottom diagonal is ignored because these represent queries for document-instruction pairs that have not yet been memorized by the model. 

> 50

M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Format type Key used Exact format Datasets used within (train/val-id/test-ood) JSON response {’response’:’...’} train message {’message’:’...’} train string {’string’:’...’} train chat {’chat’:’...’} train reply {’reply’:’...’} train answer {’answer’:’...’} train body {’body’:’...’} train payload {’payload’:’...’} train data {’data’:’...’} train output {’output’:’...’} train text {’text’:’...’} val-id content {’content’:’...’} val-id 

YAML response response: ’...’ train message message: ’...’ train string string: ’...’ train chat chat: ’...’ train reply reply: ’...’ train answer answer: ’...’ train body body: ’...’ train payload payload: ’...’ train data data: ’...’ train output output: ’...’ train text text: ’...’ val-id content content: ’...’ val-id 

CSV response response,’...’ train message message,’... train string string,’...’ train chat chat,’...’ train reply reply,’...’ train answer answer,’...’ train body body,’...’ train payload payload,’...’ train data data,’...’ train output output,’...’ train text text,’...’ val-id content content,’...’ val-id 

TOML response [response] value = ’...’ train message [message] value = ’... train string [string] value = ’...’ train chat [chat] value = ’...’ train reply [reply] value = ’...’ train answer [answer] value = ’...’ train body [body] value = ’...’ train payload [payload] value = ’...’ train data [data] value = ’...’ train output [output] value = ’...’ train text [text] value = ’...’ val-id content [content] value = ’...’ val-id 

XML response <response>...</response> test-ood message <message>...</message> test-ood string <string>...</string> test-ood chat <chat>...</chat> test-ood reply <reply>...</reply> test-ood answer <answer>...</answer> test-ood body <body>...</body> test-ood payload <payload>...</payload> test-ood data <data>...</data> test-ood output <output>...</output> test-ood text <text>...</text> test-ood content <content>...</content> test-ood 

Table 8: Types of Formats used. 

51 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Facts Formats Refusal Model Score Acc. Sel. Spec. Acc. Sel. F1 Precision Recall RAG-FT 70.5 74.5 61.8 77.1 0.0 99.9 69.4 65.6 73.7 ICL-FT 67.3 79.1 51.5 80.1 4.4 99.7 89.8 92.7 87.1 MemLLM 38.7 81.8 19.2 75.2 0.0 100.0 < 1 100.0 < 1

GNM 84.1 95.8 77.4 81.1 67.4 100.0 93.2 88.7 98.1 

GNM (Ablation) 44.5 75.4 24.8 72.2 0.0 75.4 51.0 47.7 54.7 Table 9: Experiment #2 detailed results for most recent time step. Note that Format Selectivity is an additional metric we report on here, defined as: when the model is instructed to ignore the formatting, what percentage of the time does the model correctly ignore the document’s formatting. Values below 1 are reported as < 1.

Figure 13: Performance on experiment 2 when rolling out to sequence length of 20 instead of 10. 

> 52 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Appendix D. ‘Compositional Generalization’ Experiment Details 

D.1. Learning Instructions 

We focused the experiment on the 12 categories seen during training. Because we have 12 categories, and we are targeting one for fact learning and one for refusal learning, that makes up 144 possible combinations of compositional types of learning instructions. To avoid having to author 144 learning instructions, we randomly selected a third of these combinations (making up 48 possible combinations) and used GPT-5.1 to author a compo-sitional learning instruction for the combination. All learning instructions used can be seen in Table 10. 

D.2. Testing Protocol 

We used the models trained for experiment #2 and ran them through the following testing procedure. We take episodes of length 1 (i.e. only sample one document at a time), and we randomly select a compositional learning instruction that targets two categories present in the document (one category targets fact learning, the other refusal learning). We skip the document if the document happens to have a set of facts such that there are no com-positional learning instructions that each target a category present in the document (which can happen between we do not comprehensively store all 144 possible combinations). This skipping occurred only for about half of the generated episodes. We then measure fact desirata and refusal desirata on the initial document passed in. 

D.3. Detailed Results 

Detailed results are shown in Table 13. 

> 53

M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Targeted Category For Fact Learning Targeted Category For Refusal Learning Learning Instruction 

Non-US cities or States Major West-ern European Languages Please memorize only the facts about cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States. If a fact in the document concerns major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Non-US cities or States Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Please memorize only the facts about cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States. If a fact in the document concerns Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Non-US cities or States Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Please memorize only the facts about cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States. If a fact in the document concerns technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Non-US cities or States TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Please memorize only the facts about cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States. If a fact in the document concerns entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, or other media organizations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Non-US cities or States Music or Art Related Oc-cupations Please memorize only the facts about cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States. If a fact in the document concerns music, art, literature, or entertainment-related roles (for example, genres, instruments, or artistic occupations), refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Non-US cities or States Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Please memorize only the facts about cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States. If a fact in the document concerns sports, athletes, or athletic positions such as quarterback or midfielder, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Country Major West-ern European Languages Please memorize only the facts about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations. If a fact in the document concerns major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Country Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Please memorize only the facts about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations. If a fact in the document concerns Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Country Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Please memorize only the facts about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations. If a fact in the document concerns technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Country TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Please memorize only the facts about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations. If a fact in the docu-ment concerns entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, or other media organizations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Country Music or Art Related Oc-cupations Please memorize only the facts about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations. If a fact in the document concerns music, art, literature, or entertainment-related roles (for example, genres, instruments, or artistic occupations), refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Country Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Please memorize only the facts about sovereign countries or widely recognized nations. If a fact in the docu-ment concerns sports, athletes, or athletic positions such as quarterback or midfielder, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Major West-ern European Languages Non-US Cities or States Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian. If a fact in the document concerns cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Major West-ern European Languages Country Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian. If a fact in the document concerns sovereign countries or widely recognized nations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Major West-ern European Languages Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian. If a fact in the document concerns technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Major West-ern European Languages TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian. If a fact in the document concerns entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, or other media organizations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Major West-ern European Languages Music or Art Related Oc-cupations Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian. If a fact in the document concerns music, art, literature, or entertainment-related roles (for example, genres, instruments, or artistic occupations), refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. 

Table 10: Compositional learning instructions used in experiment 3 (Part One). 

54 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Targeted Category For Fact Learning Targeted Category For Refusal Learning Learning Instruction 

Major West-ern European Languages Music or Art Related Oc-cupations Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian. If a fact in the document concerns music, art, literature, or entertainment-related roles (for example, genres, instruments, or artistic occupations), refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Major West-ern European Languages Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Please memorize only the facts about major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian. If a fact in the document concerns sports, athletes, or athletic positions such as quarterback or midfielder, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Non-US Cities or States Please memorize only the facts about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek. If a fact in the document concerns cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Country Please memorize only the facts about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek. If a fact in the document concerns sovereign countries or widely recognized nations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Please memorize only the facts about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek. If a fact in the document concerns technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Please memorize only the facts about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek. If a fact in the document concerns entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, or other media organizations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Music or Art Related Oc-cupations Please memorize only the facts about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek. If a fact in the document concerns music, art, literature, or entertainment-related roles (for example, genres, instruments, or artistic occupations), refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Please memorize only the facts about Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek. If a fact in the document concerns sports, athletes, or athletic positions such as quarterback or midfielder, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Non-US Cities or States Please memorize only the facts about technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies. If a fact in the document concerns cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Country Please memorize only the facts about technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies. If a fact in the document concerns sovereign countries or widely recognized nations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Major West-ern European Languages Please memorize only the facts about technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies. If a fact in the document concerns major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Please memorize only the facts about technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies. If a fact in the document concerns Eastern European and Mediterranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Music or Art Related Oc-cupations Please memorize only the facts about technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies. If a fact in the document concerns music, art, literature, or entertainment-related roles (for example, genres, instruments, or artistic occupations), refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Please memorize only the facts about technology, industrial, oil, or gaming companies. If a fact in the docu-ment concerns sports, athletes, or athletic positions such as quarterback or midfielder, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. 

Table 11: Compositional learning instructions used in experiment 3 (Part Two) .

55 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Targeted Category For Fact Learning Targeted Category For Refusal Learning Example Learning Instruction 

TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Non-US Cities or States Please memorize only the facts about entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, and other media organizations. If a fact in the document concerns cities, regions, provinces, or other subnational areas outside the United States, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Country Please memorize only the facts about entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, and other media organizations. If a fact in the document concerns sovereign countries or widely recognized nations, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Major West-ern European Languages Please memorize only the facts about entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, and other media organizations. If a fact in the document concerns major Western European languages such as English, French, Spanish, or Italian, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Please memorize only the facts about entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news outlets, and other media organizations. If a fact in the document concerns Eastern European and Mediter-ranean languages such as Russian, Polish, or Greek, refuse to answer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including formatting instructions or other categories. TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Music or Art Related Oc-cupations Please memorize only the facts about entertainment studios, record labels, TV channels, news out-lets, and other media organizations. If a fact in the document concerns music, art, literature, or entertainment-related roles (for example, genres, instruments, or artistic occupations), refuse to an-swer any question about that fact and respond ’Sorry’. Ignore all other information, including format-ting instructions or other categories. TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Memorize only facts about TV organizations, entertainment studios, record labels, media outlets, or news companies. Ignore all unrelated content. If any fact involves a sports-related occupation such as an athlete or athletic position, refuse to answer questions about that fact and reply ’Sorry’. Music or Art Related Oc-cupation Non-US Cities or States Memorize only facts about music, art, literature, or entertainment-related occupations. Ignore all other content. If any fact involves non-U.S. cities, regions, provinces, or subnational areas, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Music or Art Related Oc-cupation Country Memorize only facts related to artistic, musical, or literary occupations. Ignore all unrelated informa-tion. If any fact concerns a sovereign country, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Music or Art Related Oc-cupation Major West-ern European Languages Memorize only facts about artistic, musical, or literary occupations. Ignore all else. For any fact involving major Western European languages, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Music or Art Related Oc-cupation Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Memorize only facts about music, art, literature, or entertainment occupations. Ignore all unrelated data. If a fact involves Eastern European or Mediterranean languages, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Music or Art Related Oc-cupation Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Memorize only artistic, musical, or literary occupation facts. Ignore all other content. If the fact concerns a tech, industrial, oil, or gaming company, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Music or Art Related Oc-cupation TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Memorize only facts about artistic, musical, or literary occupations. Ignore other categories. If a fact concerns TV networks, entertainment studios, record labels, or news companies, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Non-US Cities or States Memorize only facts about sports roles, athletic positions, and athlete occupations. Ignore all other categories. If a fact concerns non-U.S. cities, regions, or provinces, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Country Memorize only facts about sports-related occupations and athletic roles. Ignore all unrelated content. If a fact concerns a sovereign country, refuse to answer and state ’Sorry’. Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Major West-ern European Languages Memorize only facts about sports occupations and athletic positions. Ignore other categories. If a fact concerns major Western European languages, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Eastern Euro-pean Mediter-ranean Lan-guages Memorize only facts about sports occupations and athletic roles. Ignore all other categories. If the fact involves Eastern European or Mediterranean languages, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion Tech Indus-trial or Gam-ing Company Memorize only facts about athletic roles and sports-related occupations. Ignore everything else. If a fact concerns a tech, industrial, oil, or gaming company, refuse to answer and say ’Sorry’. Sports Re-lated Occupa-tion TV Enter-tainment or News Organi-zation Memorize only facts about sports occupations and athletic positions. Ignore unrelated details. If a fact involves TV networks, entertainment studios, record labels, or news organizations, refuse to answer and reply ’Sorry’. 

Table 12: Compositional learning instructions used in experiment 3 (Part Three). 

56 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn 

Facts Refusal Model Score AccuracySelectivity Specificity F1 Precision Recall RAG 31.8 90.3 15.6 52.0 31.7 70.9 20.4 RAG-FT 49.1 98.0 25.1 90.4 78.9 68.7 92.7 

ICL 31.8 90.3 15.6 52.0 31.7 70.9 20.4 ICL-FT 11.1 100.0 4.0 91.8 83.1 82 84.3 MemLLM 34.0 87.5 16.4 63.4 1.9 25 < 1

GNM 73.8 100.0 51.1 90.2 82.1 90.4 75.2 Table 13: Experiment #3 Detailed Results. Values below 1 are reported as < 1.

> 57 M.S. Bennett, T. Zollo & R. Zemel. Tell Me What To Learn

Appendix E. Details of Memory Analysis Experiment 

To produce Figure 9, we first create 200 documents each containing two facts from our test-ood dataset, where each fact comes from a different category. We then randomly select one of the facts as the target to learn, and another as the distractor, and select the corresponding learning instruction to direct the model to learn the target and not the distractor. Then we pass the document-instruction pair to GNM and the ablated model. We identify the index within the input document that contains the tokens associated with the target fact, and those that are associated with the distractor fact. For example, if the input document were: 

learn these new facts: * Angola is in Antarctica * The instrument that George Washington played most often was the electric guitar 

And the learning instruction were to learn facts relating to continents but nothing else, then we would find the index for the tokens within “Antarctica” (i.e. the target tokens) and those within “electric guitar” (i.e. the distractor tokens). Then throughout each layer produced throughout the forward pass that produces the new memory, we compare the average embedding across all new 256 tokens produced at that layer, to the embedding direction of the target tokens and those of the distractor tokens. Specifically, we first compute the difference at each layer between the target token direction and the distractor token direction, and then take the dot product of that with respect to the average direction across all new memory tokens produced at that layer. This provides a measure of how much the 256 new memory tokens in a given layer conform to the hidden representation of the target fact vs that of the distractor fact. Also note that we ignore the last layer in Figure 8 as we expect it to be designed not for memory but for generation, and thus not be representative of the effect we are analyzing.